The Project Gutenberg eBook of John de Lancaster: a novel; vol. I
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: John de Lancaster: a novel; vol. I


Author: Richard Cumberland

Release date: September 27, 2022 [eBook #69055]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Lackington, Allen, and Co, 1809

Credits: Sonya Schermann, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER: A NOVEL; VOL. I ***





                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.


                               VOLUME I.




                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.

                               A NOVEL.

                                  BY

                      _RICHARD CUMBERLAND, ESQ._

                           IN THREE VOLUMES.

                                VOL. I.

                               _LONDON_:

                PRINTED FOR LACKINGTON, ALLEN, AND CO.

                         TEMPLE OF THE MUSES,

                           FINSBURY-SQUARE.

                                 1809.




           Harding and Wright, Printers, St. John’s Square.




JOHN DE LANCASTER.




CHAPTER I.

_The Reader is made acquainted with the Family of De Lancaster._


On the first of March 1751, Robert De Lancaster, a native of North
Wales, and grandfather of my hero, had assembled his friends and
neighbours to celebrate, according to custom, the anniversary of their
tutelary saint.

I enter at once upon my story without any introduction, having already
announced this novel in my Memoirs, and I flatter myself, if it is
perused with that candour, to which fair dealing has some claim, it
will serve to entertain the major part of its readers, disappoint not
many and corrupt not one.

Robert de Lancaster was a gentleman of great respectability, and
Kray-castle, the venerable seat of his family through many generations,
lost nothing of its long-established fame for hospitality on this
occasion: the gentry were feasted, and the poor were not forgotten.

The family of this worthy antient Briton consisted of an only son
Philip, married to an heiress of the house of Morgan, and a maiden
daughter, named Cecilia. He was himself a widower. Mrs. Philip De
Lancaster was at this time in that state, which gave speedy hopes of an
heir to the very ancient family, into which she had married: in the
festivities of the day she had taken little share, and in the
superintendence of her father-in-law’s household absolutely none: that
province she had found in much more able hands, and never sought to
interfere with the administration of it: in short she had no ambition
for authority, and very great objection to any thing, that might require
exertion, or occasion trouble.

Cecilia De Lancaster from the death of her mother, through a period of
more than ten years, had patiently and without repining suffered her
youth to pass away, amply repayed by the love and approbation of her
father, whilst she devoted herself to all those duties, which had
devolved upon her, when Kray Castle lost its mistress. Her brother
Philip had quite as little disposition to trouble as his lady, so that
all things were under the unenvied government of Cecilia; and every
guest, that resorted to the house, every domestic, that belonged to it,
bore witness to the excellence of her administration.

A character like hers, though located amidst the recesses of
Merionethshire, could not be totally divested of attraction; for she had
high pretensions on the score of fortune, and a pedigree, that only
stopped where the world began: these might have been enough to satisfy
any reasonable man, though some perhaps would have rated them the higher
for the loveliness of her person, the excellence of her understanding
and the virtues of her mind.

Amongst the many suitors, who in various periods of her celibacy had
been induced to propose themselves to her, none had been so persevering
in his addresses as Sir Owen ap Owen, baronet, a gentleman by no means
of yesterday, and possessed of a very fair and ample landed property,
upon which there were no other encumbrances save only the barren rocks
and unproductive mountains, over which it stretched. He was indeed not
very eminent as a scholar; for although Sir Owen had without doubt been
taught to read, he had almost entirely discontinued the practice of it:
and indeed, considering the nature of Sir Owen’s more immediate
pursuits, reading might very well be dispensed with, as it could only
tend to interrupt his evening nap, and not improve him in the art of
hallooing to his hounds, or pushing round the tankard to a tawdry toast:
he however administered justice to his neighbours, and settled
differences in a summary way after a fashion of his own, by reference
not to any books of law, but to the beer barrels in his cellar; by
which his decisions as a magistrate became extremely popular, and men
quarrelled first, that they might get drunk afterwards, and patch up the
peace in their cups, which they had broken when they were sober. By
these means Sir Owen got a good name in the county, and supported a
considerable interest, which he never failed to employ, as his fathers
had done before him, in opposing and railing at the minister of the day,
whoever that obnoxious animal might chance to be.

This distinguished personage was now in the fifth year of his
suitorship, and verging towards the fiftieth of his age, whilst the
inexorable Cecilia had already endured a siege half as long as that of
Troy, without betraying any symptoms, that might indicate a surrender.
In fact Sir Owen seemed now to content himself with a yearly summons,
like the Moors before Ceuta, as a compliment to his perseverance, and to
keep up appearances and pretensions.

It was now Saint David’s day, when he never failed to be a visitor to
the castle, and he had brushed out the lining of his coach, and put
himself in his best array, to do honour to the festival, at which he
knew Cecilia would preside. His person was not eminently graceful, for
he was a round, red-faced gentleman, neither tall of stature, nor light
of limb; but his apparel bore the faded marks of ancient splendor, and
his huntsman had bestowed uncommon pains in frizzing out a huge white
perriwig, which he had powdered with no sparing hand. Sir Owen was at no
time apt to be an idle looker-on whilst the bottle was in circulation,
and on the present occasion he had charged himself more than usually
high to encounter an opposition, which he had reason to expect would be
more than usually stubborn; for though due consideration had been paid
to his rank, and he had been placed at table close beside the lady, who
presided at it, fortune had not favoured him with any striking
opportunities for displaying his address, or advancing himself in her
good graces. On the contrary he had been rather unlucky in his
assiduities, and in his eagerness to dispute the ladle had overset the
soup, with sundry other little misadventures, incidental to an awkward
operator and an unsteady hand.

It is perfectly well understood, that the worthy baronet had pledged
himself to his privy counsellor the huntsman for vigorous measures;
confessing to him, whilst assisting at his toilette, with the candour
natural to his character, that he was ashamed of hanging so long upon a
cold scent, and protesting, with a due degree of spirit, that he would
that very day either bring the trail to an entapis, or give up the
chace, and draw off; for which manly resolution he had all proper credit
given him by the partaker of his secrets, and the companion of his
sports.

When the gentlemen had sate a reasonable time after the ladies had
retired, it was the custom of the house to adjourn to the drawing room,
where Cecilia administered the ceremonials of the tea-table. It was here
Sir Owen meditated to plant himself once more by her side, and bring his
fortune to a crisis; trusting that wine, which had fortified him with
courage, would not fail to inspire him with eloquence. High in hope,
and eager to acquit himself of his promise to his confidante at home,
upon entering the room he pushed his course directly for the tea-table,
where the cluster of candles and the dazzling gleams reflected from the
polished apparatus, there displayed in glittering splendor, so
confounded his optics, that without discovering the person of Mrs.
Philip De Lancaster, or computing distances so as to bring up in time,
he came foul of the tea-table, and discharged a part of the wreck with a
horrible crash into the lap of the aforesaid lady, whilst his head came
to the floor amidst the fragments of broken cups and sawcers with an
impunity, which no common head would probably have had to boast of in
the like circumstance. Dreadful was the consternation of the company,
most alarmingly critical were the screams and convulsive throes of the
unfortunate lady, whose lap was ill prepared to receive any such
accession to the burden, which it was already doomed to carry. The
consequences in short were so immediate, and their symptoms so decisive,
that had not Mr. Llewellyn been in attendance, and happily not quite so
tipsy as to be incapacitated from affording his assistance, the world
might have lost the pleasure of reading these adventures, and I the fame
of recording them.

A couch being provided, and the lady laid at her length upon it, she was
carried up to her chamber, whilst the castle echoed with her piercing
screams.

It would be treating this serious misadventure much too lightly, were I
only to remark that the love-scene in projectu was of necessity
adjourned by Cecilia’s leaving the company, and attending upon her
sister-in-law, whom a whole bevy of females under the conduct of the
sage Llewellyn followed up the stairs. We may well suppose, where one so
able was present to direct, and so many were assembled, ready either to
obey, or sagaciously to look on and edify, that every thing needful for
a lady in her critical situation was provided and administered. Every
visitor, whose recollection served to remind him that after such a
discomfiture the speediest retreat was the best compliment he could pay
to the master of the house, called for their horses and their carriages
to the great disappointment of their servants, who had not yet paid all
the honours to Saint David, that were by customary right Saint David’s
due.

Sir Owen ap Owen, who had already taken some little time to recover his
legs, found himself still at a loss to recall his recollection. At
length, after contemplating the chaos he had created--By the Lord,
friend De Lancaster, he exclaimed, I have made a terrible wreck of your
crockery; but you should warn your housemaids not to dry rub your
floors, for they are as slippery as glass, and let a man tread ever so
carefully, a false step may throw him off his balance, and then who can
answer for the mischief he may do? I heard a terrible screaming, but I
hope, my good neighbour, nobody is hurt, and if your fair daughter, the
divine Cecilia, (so I always call her) is inconsolable about her china,
and if London can’t repair the loss, the East Indies shall, though I go
all the way to fetch it home for her myself; for though I know well
enough I have had a glass too much, and am but as you may call me a kind
of bear in a ball-room, yet I know what a gentleman ought to do, when he
has done mischief; and on the word of a true ancient Briton you may
believe me, that if I had undesignedly set fire to your house, I am no
such Hanoverian rat as to run away by the light of it: that is not my
principle.

Your principle, my good friend, replied De Lancaster, nobody doubts, and
if your accident shall be productive of no other mischief than what has
happened to Cecilia’s tea-cups, Cecilia thinks no more of them than I
do. The screams you heard did not proceed from her--

No, no, cried Sir Owen, her sweet pipe never uttered such a shrill
veiw-hollah; so if she is safe from hurt and harm, all is well. ’Twas
an accident, as you say, and there’s an end of it.

A servant now announced to the baronet, that his coach was at the door.
De Lancaster entered into no farther explanations, and his awkward guest
surrendered himself to the guidance of a coachman luckily not quite so
tipsey as his master.




CHAPTER II.

_Conversation in a Library._


When the wheels of Sir Owen’s coach had ceased from rattling over the
flinty pavement of the castle court, Robert De Lancaster glanced his
eyes round the room, and in a corner of it discovered his son Philip,
unnoticed of him before. Neither the cataract and confusion, that had
ensued upon Sir Owen’s tumble, nor the screams of a lady, in whose
safety he might be presumed to have some interest, had provoked this
disciple of Harpocrates to violate his taciturnity, or to stir from his
seat. At the same instant Colonel Wilson, a friend of the family,
entered, and brought tidings from the runners in the service of Mr.
Llewellyn, that things above stairs were going on as well as could be
expected.

Then with your leave, Colonel, said the lord of the castle, we will
adjourn to my library, and there await the event. Upon the word Philip
started from his corner, ran to the door and held it open for his
father. A silent bow was interchanged at passing; the library was near
at hand: the chairs were set ready, the candles lighted and the three
gentlemen arranged themselves round the fire in their customary seats.

I think, said De Lancaster, addressing himself to the colonel, amongst
all the extravagancies I have been betrayed into, there is none that
sits so light upon my conscience, as the passion I have had for
collecting books.

They certainly are a source of pleasure, said the colonel, to the
readers of them.

They cause great trouble to the writers, Philip answered in an under
voice, as if talking to himself.

Colonel Wilson was a disabled officer, having lost a leg in the service,
and had now retired upon a sinecure government of twenty shillings per
day to a small patrimonial estate in the near neighbourhood of Kray
Castle: he was a few years younger than Robert De Lancaster, who had
now kept his sixtieth birthday. Wilson had two sons; the elder was in
the army, and the younger at the head of Westminster school: he was a
man of strict probity, good understanding and an excellent heart. These
were qualities, which De Lancaster knew how to appreciate as well as any
man, and though his studies and pursuits had been widely different from
those of the Colonel, yet he courted his company, and lived in perfect
harmony with him as his friend and neighbour. Wilson on his part was not
blind to the eccentricities of De Lancaster, but as they never disagreed
except upon points, that did not interest the passions, their disputes
were carried on without any mixture of acrimony, and only served to keep
the conversation amicably alive.

Wilson had lived in the world; De Lancaster in study and retirement: the
latter would sometimes contend against assumptions, which to the former
appeared to be little less than self-evident; in the mean time De
Lancaster would oftentimes undertake to demonstrate paradoxes, that to
Wilson’s unsophisticated understanding seemed perfectly inexplicable:
these he was in the habit neither to admit, nor pertinaciously to
contest: if he had done the first, there would have been a speedy end to
the discussion; if he had pursued the latter course, there would have
been no end at all, for De Lancaster was not often in the humour to
recede from his positions.

Philip De Lancaster on the contrary believed all things, and examined
none: he was a man of great faith and few words; by no means wanting in
curiosity, but extremely averse from enquiry and trouble. Being an only
son and heir to the wealthy house of De Lancaster, it was thought
adviseable by the fathers on each side, who were the contracting
parties, that he should take to wife Matilda, only child of old Morgan
of Glen-Morgan, and presumptive heiress to his fortune and estate.
Philip, who had shewn no ardour as a lover, was by no means remarkably
uxorious as a husband; and Matilda did not molest him with her fondness
or attentions: They lived in the same house as appurtenances to the
family at Kray Castle, (for such from time immemorial had been the
custom of the De Lancasters) and they lived without quarrelling; for
they were very little together; their passions were never roused by
contradiction, or enflamed by jealousy; the husband had no attachments,
and the wife, who was said to have been thwarted in her first love, laid
herself out for no future admirers.

These few preliminary remarks may probably account for the placidity,
with which Philip now sate down in the library between his father and
the colonel to wait the issue of an event, in which if he did not
manifest a very lively interest, the reason very probably was, because
he did not feel it.

Philip, (if his sage remark is in the recollection of the reader) had
risqued a truism, when he modestly suggested that it was a troublesome
task to write a book. Philip did not speak this from his own experience;
therefore it is, that I call his truism a risque, for it was not always
that his father gave his passport to assertions of that character; but
the learned gentleman’s thoughts were just then employed not upon the
trouble, that we take when we bring our works into the world, but the
trouble, which we give, when we ourselves are brought into it, and upon
this topic he began to descant, as follows.

The unlucky accident, by which my blundering neighbour has precipitated
Mrs. De Lancaster into labour-pains, must in all probability tend to
aggravate and enhance those sorrows, in which by the condition of her
sex she is destined to bring forth; and indeed, independent of that
accident, I should not wonder if the pains she suffers, and the screams
she utters, were more than ordinarily acute and piercing, planted as she
now is, by adoption into my family, in the very stream and current from
the fountain head of the primæval curse--

Whereabouts are we now, said the colonel within himself?

--Nevertheless, under the pressure of these apprehensions, I console
myself with the reflection, that if the general observation, that what
we produce with difficulty we are thereby influenced to preserve with
diligence, be true in all other cases, it will be also true in that of
child-bearing. If so, we may expect that the _storgee_, or natural
affection of my daughter-in-law towards her infant will be
proportionally greater than that of mothers, who shall have had easier
times.

I see no grounds for that conclusion, replied the colonel.

Surely, sir, resumed De Lancaster, you must have remarked, that in all
our operations, whether mental or manual, we are naturally most attached
to those on which most pains and labour have been expended. Slight
performances and slight opinions may be easily given up, but where great
deliberation has been bestowed, we are not soon persuaded to admit that
our time has been misspent and our talents misapplied.

Certainly, replied Wilson, there are some points, upon which we ought
not to waver in our opinions, but there are many others, which it is not
worth our while to be too pertinacious in defending. In my profession we
must not quarrel with men for their caprices, so long as they are not
mischievously or impiously eccentric. It is not often we can find a
mess-room in the same way of thinking, except upon the question of
another bottle.

In your profession, my good friend, resumed De Lancaster, (for which I
have all possible respect) the pliability you describe may be perfectly
in character, and much to be commended; for where differences are to be
adjusted by arguments, swords should not be admitted into the
conference. In my system of life I see no reason why I should be bound
to think with the majority; nay, I confess to you I am very ill inclined
to subscribe to popular opinions, unless upon strict investigation.

Are they always worth it? said the colonel.

I should think not, echoed Philip.

Pardon me, exclaimed De Lancaster! So many things are assumed without
being examined, and so many disbelieved without being disproved, that I
am not hasty to assent or dissent in compliment to the multitude; and on
this account perhaps I am considered as a man affecting singularity: I
hope I am not to be found guilty of that idle affectation, only because
I would not be a dealer in opinions, which I have not weighed before I
deliver them out. Above all things I would not traffic in conjectures,
but carefully avoid imposing upon others or myself by confident
anticipation, when nothing can be affirmed with certainty in this mortal
state of chance and change, that is not grounded on conviction; for
instance, in the case of the lady above stairs, whose situation keeps
our hopes and fears upon the balance, our presumption is, that Mrs. De
Lancaster shall be delivered of a child, either male or female, and in
all respects like other children--

I confess, said Wilson, that is my presumption, and I should be most
outrageously astonished, should it happen otherwise.

I don’t think it likely, murmured Philip.

No, no, no, replied De Lancaster; but we need not be reminded how many
præternatural and prodigious births have occurred and been recorded in
the annals of mankind. Whether the natives of the town of Stroud near
Rochester are to this day under the ban of Thomas a Becket I am not
informed; but when, in contempt of that holy person, they wantonly cut
off the tail of his mule as he rode through their street, you have it
from authority that every child thenceforward born to an inhabitant of
Stroud was punished by the appendage of an incommodious and enormous
tail, exactly corresponding with that, which had been amputated from
the archbishop’s mule.

Here a whistle from the colonel struck the auditory nerves of Philip,
who, gently laying his hand upon his stump, gravely reminded him that
Becket was a saint--

De Lancaster proceeded--- What then shall we say of the famous Martin
Luther, who being ordained to act so conspicuous a part in opposition to
the papal power, came into the world fully equipped for controversy; his
mother being delivered of her infant, (wonderful to relate) habited in
all points as a theologian, and (which I conceive must have sensibly
incommoded her) wearing a square cap on his head, according to academic
costuma. This, Colonel Wilson, may perhaps appear to you, as no doubt
it did to the midwife and all present at his birth, as a very
extraordinary and præternatural circumstance.

It does indeed appear so, said the colonel. I know you don’t invent the
fable; I should like to know your authority for it.

My authority, replied De Lancaster, in this case is the same as in that
of Becket’s mule; Martinus Delrius is my authority for both; and when we
find this gravely set forth by a writer of such high dignity and credit,
himself a doctor of theology, and public professor of the Holy
Scriptures in the university of Salamanca, who is bold enough to
question it?

I am not bold enough to believe it, said Wilson.




CHAPTER III.

_An Accession to the ancient Family of De Lancaster._


When the good man of the house perceived that the Salamanca doctor and
his anecdotes only moved the ridicule of his friend Wilson, and even
staggered the credulity of his son Philip, he pursued the subject no
further, but wearied with the exertions and agitations of the day leaned
back in his easy chair, and fell asleep. The parties, that were still
awake, seemed mutually disposed to enjoy their meditations in silence,
till upon the Castle clock’s striking eleven, Philip appositely remarked
that it wanted but an hour to twelve--

And then, said Wilson, the first of March will have become the second of
March, so that if your boy don’t make haste into the world, saint
David’s day will be over, and he will not have the privilege of being
born with a leek in his bonnet, and Martin Luther will keep the field of
wonders to himself.

The story is very extraordinary, said Philip; but do you think it is
true?

Do I think it is true, replied Wilson, that this gentleman, (pointing to
a picture over the chimney) whom I take to be Icarus, came into the
world, as the painter has described him, with his wings at full stretch?
If you can give credit to the one, you may believe the other.

I think the safest way is to believe neither, Philip observed; but the
gentleman you point at is not what you suppose: I believe he is some
King: It is a family piece, and my father can explain it to you.

That I will do directly, cried the father, who had waked just in time to
hear what his son had been saying. The personage you enquire about is
not Icarus, but King Bladud of unfortunate memory, and the incident
being historically connected with the records of my family, I have had
the picture cleaned and repaired, and conspicuously hung, as you see,
over the chimney piece of my library. He with the wings is, as I told
you, King Bladud: He has miscarried in his experiment, and fallen to the
ground from the topmost pinnacle of the Temple of Apollo. The venerable
old man in the sacerdotal habit is the priest of Apollo, and the
Philosopher in the saffron-coloured mantle is my ancestor, the ingenious
contriver of the unlucky pinions. From him it is I date the privilege of
attaching wings to my more ancient bearing of the Harp, as you see it
displayed on the banners in the hall, and in sundry other parts of the
castle, with the appropriate motto underwritten--DUM CŒLUM PETO, CANTUM
EDO.

Thank you, my good sir, said the colonel: I am perfectly satisfied. For
my own part I am contented to exhibit three cockle-shells on the handles
of my spoons, but where I picked them up, and how I came by them, I know
no more than the man in the moon, nor care.

At this instant Cecilia entered the room, and, running up to her father,
joyfully announced the welcome entrance of our hero on this mortal stage
in the character of a lovely boy, adding in the usual phrase that the
mother was quite as well as could be expected.

I rejoice to hear it; I rejoice to hear it, exclaimed the grandfather.
But, my dear Cecilia, are you quite certain that it is a boy?

Dear sir, replied Cecilia, you wont suppose the people about my sister
can be deceived as to that.

Why no, said De Lancaster, upon better recollection I presume they
cannot.

Cecilia directed a congratulatory look to her brother, and nodding to
him, as she left the room, said, I give you joy, Philip, I give you joy
with all my heart. Philip received it with many thanks, and entertained
it with much composure.

Reach me the family bible, son, said De Lancaster, and looked at his
watch, observing that it wanted half an hour of midnight. He thereupon
entered the day and hour of his grandson’s birth in the recording leaf
of the aforesaid holy book; observing, that he would postpone engrossing
the event into his pedigree roll till his attorney could attend for that
purpose--I confess, added he, it is more properly the office of my bard
David Williams, but as he, poor man, is blind, I shall wink at his
excusing himself from that branch of his duty.

I don’t see how you can well do less, said the colonel.

He will be christened John, continued the old gentleman, not attending
to the colonel’s remark: the links in the chain of my genealogy have
long been distinguished by the alternate names of John, Robert and
Philip, and the brightest of the three has fallen to his turn. The Johns
have been the heroes of the family: That was my father’s name; he was a
gentleman of the most punctilious honour, but he was killed in a duel
with a foreign officer, who happened to tread upon the train of my
mother’s gown in a ball-room. The Philips universally, without the
exception of my worthy son here present, have been lovers of their ease,
and my great-grandfather was very generally distinguished by the style
and title of Robert the Philologist: by manuscripts, which are now in my
possession, it appears, that he had been at considerable pains and study
in writing comments and annotations for a new and splendid edition of
the _Incredibilia_ of Palæphatus: This he did not live to complete, but
he is said more than once to have declared, that he would convince the
world, that Palæphatus told many more truths than he himself was aware
of.

Perhaps Palæphatus atoned for it, said the colonel, by telling many
untruths, that he was aware of;--but is it not time to go to bed?




CHAPTER IV.

_Our Hero pays his first Visit to his Grandfather. The congratulatory
Lay of the Minstrel._


The next morning Robert de Lancaster rose with the sun. From the window
of his chamber he cast his eyes over that grand and beautiful expanse of
country, which the proud and lofty site of his castle overpeered. It was
the first sun, that had risen on his new-born hope, and the splendour,
which that glorious luminary diffused over the animating scenery under
his survey, was to a mind like his peculiarly auspicious and impressive:
his bosom glowed with pious gratitude to the Supreme Dispenser of those
blessings--It is too much, all-bounteous Being, he exclaimed, too much
for sinful man! I am not worthy of such goodness.

He summoned his servant, and being informed that the night had passed
well with Mrs. De Lancaster, he desired the child might be brought to
him: his wish was speedily obeyed. He stood for some time intently
gazing on the countenance of his grandchild, and at length pronounced it
to be a perfect model of infantine beauty, open and ingenuous, every
thing in short that his warmest wishes could have pictured.

I perceive, cried he, and can decypher the hand-writing of nature in the
expressive lineaments of this lovely babe: if God, who gave him life,
shall in his mercy give him length of days, he will be an honour to his
name and an ornament to his country.

He is a sweet pretty puppet, said the nurse.

Pooh! cried the prophet, I am not speaking of what he is, I am telling
what he will be. I prognosticate that he will be brave, benevolent, and
virtuous--

And handsome and tall and well-shaped, re-echoed the loquacious dame;
only look what fine straight limbs he has, pretty fellow!

Take yourself away with him! cried De Lancaster in displeasure. You have
interrupted me with your chatter, and the continuity of those thoughts,
which spontaneously presented themselves, is no more to be resumed.

The nurse departed, dancing the child in her arms, and prattling to it
in her way, unconscious of the offence she had committed, whilst De
Lancaster, pacing up and down his room, in vain attempted to find that
place in the book of fate, from which her untimely gabble had caused him
to break off--It is lost, said he to himself; I can only discern bright
gleams of virtuous happiness, but not unclouded, not without those
darkening shadows, that denounce misfortune.--Heaven forbid my father’s
fate should be this infant’s portion with my father’s name!

He ceased; sate down, and, whilst the tear hung on his cheek, silently
put up an unpremeditated prayer.

It was his custom every morning after he had dressed himself for the day
to be attended by his bard David Williams, and it was now the hour for
the old man to present himself with his harp at the door of his patron’s
chamber: whilst he was in it, all approach was interdicted; the mind of
De Lancaster seemed in a peculiar manner to sympathize with the melody
of the harp: he had not only a national predilection for that instrument
in common with his countrymen of the principality, but professed an
hereditary attachment to it as a true De Lancaster, whose ancestors had
worn it on their shields from the days of King Bardus. He had now heard
the signal, that announced the morning visit of his minstrel, but a
doubt struck him whether he could admit him to perform without hazarding
an infringement upon his own order for general silence throughout the
castle, as recommended by the sage Llewellyn: whilst pausing upon this
dilemma it luckily occurred to his recollection, that there was a piano
as well as a forte upon his favourite instrument, and furthermore, that
the apartment of his daughter-in-law was at the greatest possible
distance from his own; balancing these considerations in his mind, the
good man became satisfied upon the point in doubt so far, that David was
allowed to enter, and perform his morning serenade under suitable
restrictions.

There was a stool, on which Williams always sate during his
performances, and an easy chair, in which the patron reposed himself,
and indulged his silent meditations. By signals audibly given, on the
arms of the aforesaid chair the blind musician was directed to modulate
the character and spirit of his movements, so as to correspond and
accord with the movements of the hearer’s mind. It was a communication
without language, perfectly well understood by the performer, who no
sooner heard the signal for soft music than he began a prelude so
exquisitely tender, that the strings only whispered under his fingers,
till at length being filled with the inspiration of his muse, he broke
forth extemporaneously into the following strains--

    “Shine forth, bright sun, and gild the day,
    “That greets our new-born hope with light!
    “Give me to feel thy cheering ray,
    “Tho’ these dark orbs are wrapt in night.

    “Yet Heav’n in pity hath allow’d
    “These hands to wake the tuneful string,
    “The muse her influence hath bestow’d,
    “And taught her sightless bard to sing.

    “Sound then, my harp, thy softest strain,
    “Melodious solace of the blind!
    “Airs, that may heal a mother’s pain,
    “And sooth a father’s anxious mind!

    “Hush, hush! for now the infant sleeps--
    “Let no rude string disturb its rest;
    “And lo! instinctively it creeps
    “To nestle at its parent breast.

    “Ah luckless me! these curtain’d eyes
    “Shall never view its lovely face;
    “I ne’er must see that star arise,
    “The day-spring of an ancient race.

    “Father of life, in mercy take
    “This infant to thy nursing care,
    “And for the virtuous grandsire’s sake
    “Oh! hear the humble minstrel’s pray’r!

    “Grant that this babe, as yet the last
    “Of Lancaster’s time-honour’d name,
    “When coming ages shall have past,
    “May rank amongst the first in fame!”

Thou hast sung well, David Williams, said the patron, as soon as the
harp had ceased, and I command thee to accept, and wear upon thy finger,
this antique beryl, upon which is engraved a head of the poet Homer, thy
prototype in melody not less than in misfortune. Thy muse, old man,
hath not been unpropitious: go thy way therefore, and cherish thy spirit
with the best flask of metheglin, that my cellars afford. I know it is
thy favourite Helicon, which at once gives nerves to thy fingers, and
nourishment to thy fancy. Get thee hence, blind bard, and be merry!

Old David devoutly drew the ring on his finger, and with a profound
obeisance replied--I thank you and I bless you, my munificent patron. I
will drink prosperity to the illustrious house of De Lancaster and the
new-born heir thereof. It has stood from the time when the old world was
deluged, may it stand till the time when the new one shall be dissolved!

With these words David took his leave and departed, whilst De Lancaster,
glowing with that pure sensation of refined delight, which music can
convey to its admirers, and blest in having now recruited his pedigree
with a new descendant from the loins of Noah, sallied forth for the
breakfast room, displaying on his stately person a new suit, after an
old fashion, of flaming full-trimmed scarlet, ornamented with enormous
gold-worked buttons, plentifully dispersed; a prodigious flowing
perriwig of natural hair sable as the raven’s plume, with rolled silk
stockings and high-topped square-toed shoes, which, resounding upon
every step of the oaken stairs as he descended, gave loud and early
notice of his approach to the personages assembled to receive him.

Cecilia, Philip and Colonel Wilson in turn presented themselves, and
received his cordial embrace, for in his heart nature had implanted all
the warm affections of father and of friend, and in courtesy of manners
he was a sample of the chivalric ages; Llewellyn therefore was by no
means overlooked; his services were both highly praised, and liberally
repaid. Lawyer Davis also attended, being summoned for the purpose of
the enrolment. So many were the messages of enquiry from the neighbours
round the castle, that almost every servant and retainer belonging to
his houshold made an errand to present themselves and pay homage to
their good old master. Had pen, ink and paper been called for, there
would have been three domestics to have brought them in: in the mean
while it may be presumed that the more than usually profound respect,
with which they accompanied their devoirs, was in some degree owing to
the awe they were impressed with by the splendor, in which they saw him
now arrayed; and certain it is, if they needed any pardon for this
excess of reverence towards a mortal like themselves, the stately person
and commanding countenance of Robert De Lancaster were exactly such, as
in their predicament might serve for an apology: his stature was of the
tallest, but well-proportioned and erect; his frame athletic, but
without a trace of clumsiness or vulgarity; his voice, his action, his
address were all of that character, which seemed peculiarly adapted to
impose respect. Colonel Wilson, who had got secret intimation of this
brilliant sortie, which his friend was about to make, had brushed up his
epaulets, and turned out in full uniform for the occasion.

Not so Sir Owen ap Owen, baronet, of Penruth Abbey, who, having been
told of the event as he had just turned his hounds into cover, instantly
galloped off to Kray Castle; and being now ushered into the room in his
hunting jacket and boots, exhibited a figure, which both in dress and
address was as perfect a contrast to that we have been describing, as
reality could present, or imagination feign.

Cecilia took an early opportunity of saying she was upon duty and
withdrew: the rest of the company fell off one and one, and Sir Owen
found himself left with Mr. De Lancaster.

What ensued will be related in the following chapter.




CHAPTER V.

_An importunate Visitor interrupts the Business of the Morning._


It must be obvious to the well-bred reader, that this visit of Sir Owen
to the worthy owner of Kray Castle, though not exactly in form, was
nevertheless not out of place, considering what had passed in the
antecedent day. We may literally say that it was made upon the spur of
the occasion, and this we hope will be an apology for our introducing
the baronet in boots. Without doubt he was conscious that something more
was due from him than a simple enquiry could acquit him of, but the
happy turn things had taken, since his head came to the floor and our
hero into the world, relieved him in great part from his embarrassment:
the politeness of De Lancaster put him entirely at his ease, when
turning to Sir Owen, he said--I think, my good neighbour, as I am
indebted to you on my boy’s account for his early introduction into
life, there is nothing wanting to complete the favour but that you
should take some charge of him, now he is with us, and stand godfather
at the christening.

To this the baronet made answer, that he should be ready to obey the
call, and was greatly flattered by it, adding with a significant smile,
that it was not his fault, if he had not by this time had the honour of
standing in a nearer relation to a grandson of Mr. De Lancaster than
that of godfather; to which the other as readily replied--Neither was it
his fault.

This was so fair an opening, that Sir Owen could not miss it, and _upon
this hint he spake_. His speech, though not remarkable for its
eloquence, was extremely easy to be understood: he professed a very
sincere esteem and high respect for the amiable Cecilia: he would make a
very handsome settlement upon her, and add two horses to complete his
set, so that she should command her coach and six; he would new set the
family jewels, furnish the best apartments afresh, and build her a
conservatory: he would leave off smoking, take to tea in an afternoon,
and learn quadrille: he would move the dog-kennel to a greater distance
from his house, that the hounds might not wake her in a morning: he
would stand candidate for the county at the next election, and as soon
as he had taken his seat in parliament, and overturned the present
ministry, he did not doubt of being made a lord. He said he was well
aware of the lady’s high pretensions on the score of pedigree, but he
flattered himself he should have something to say on that head, when he
had looked into matters, and refreshed his memory; this he knew for a
fact--that old Robin ap Rees, his minstrel, had records to prove that
his ancestors, the Ap Owens, were not drowned in the general deluge, but
saved themselves with their goats on the tops of their mountains in
Merionethshire; and this should be made appear to the satisfaction of
Cecilia as clear as the sun at noon-day: he added in conclusion, that as
a mark of his respect for the name of De Lancaster, his second son
should bear it jointly with his own, coupled with another _ap_.

These proposals being submitted, he wished to know if there was any
thing more, that could be required of him for the satisfaction and
content of the lady he aspired to. To this Robert De Lancaster gravely
answered, that certainly there was nothing wanting to complete his
wishes but her consent.

Why that is what I have always intimated to her, cried the baronet, that
she had nothing to do but to say yes, and I was ready to strike hands
upon the word and clinch the bargain. When a thing can so easily be set
to rights, it is rather surprising to me, that she can hesitate about
it.

Upon De Lancaster’s dropping a hint as to the seriousness of an
engagement for life, and that two opinions must coincide upon that
measure, Sir Owen very appositely observed, that it was mere loss of
time to spin out a business year after year, that could be finished in a
single minute.

I grant you, my good friend, said De Lancaster, that Cecilia could do
more towards settling this affair in the space of one minute than you
and I could do in a twelvemonth, for she is absolutely her own mistress;
therefore with your leave we will turn it over to her, and when I have
next the honour to see you, I will engage you shall have an answer from
her own lips: let me only request you to receive that answer as
decisive, be it what it may; and for your own as well as for her repose
stir the question no more.

So let it be! replied Sir Owen, and fit it is that so it should be; for,
take notice, I am getting on all this while, and she is not standing
still in life, so that for the sake of posterity we had best lose no
more time about it. If it is to be, the sooner it is done the better;
if it is not, why there must be an end of it; I must turn my horse’s
head, as they say, another way; and that puts me in mind that I have
left the hounds in cover, and, if they find, I shall be quite and clean
thrown out.

Nothing in this life more likely, replied old Robert archly, and with
this answer, which cut two ways at once, the baronet, who just then
thought of nothing but his hounds, bustled out of the room, muttering to
himself--Huntsman will wonder what, the plague, has become of me.




CHAPTER VI.

_Some Men are more fond of telling long Stories than others are of
listening to them._


When this inauspicious conference was over, and the subject matter left,
in the diplomatic phrase, _ad referendum_, Robert de Lancaster, who was
anxious to dispatch the more interesting business of the day, rang the
bell for his servant, and by him was informed that all parties were in
readiness to attend him to the audit-room, where, amongst other family
treasures, the record of his pedigree was kept in a vaulted casemate so
fortified, as to bid defiance both to force and fire.

Accompanied by Cecilia, Philip, Wilson and Lawyer Davis, followed by the
nurse carrying the infant, and Williams, in his bardal habit, led by a
venerable domestic out of livery, he proceeded to the spot, and with his
own hands liberated the incarcerated roll. It was a splendid record, and
when spread out at full length exhibited several figures gaudily
emblazoned. Colonel Wilson, who had no great respect at heart, but much
gravity of countenance, whilst these ceremonials were in operation,
addressing himself to the master of the show, said--It is well, my good
friend, that you have stage room enough to display this fine
spectacle in perfection without putting any of your ancestors to
inconvenience--Then passing along till he came to the upper end of the
roll, where Japheth, son of Noah, conspicuously kept his post, and
pointing to a figure on the step next below him, he gravely asked who
that majestic personage might be in kingly robes, wearing a crown on
his head, and carrying a sceptre in his hand: Robert De Lancaster as
gravely replied, that it was Samothes, the first sovereign monarch of
this island, from him called Samothea.--Wilson bowed, and obtruded no
more questions.

Whilst the ceremony of enrolment was in process--I record this infant,
said the grandfather, by the name of John, although he hath not yet
received the sacred rite of baptism, forasmuch as the _pronomina_ of
John, Robert and Philip have been successively adopted by my family from
the very earliest time of the Christian æra to the present--Write him
down therefore by the name of John.

This being done in proper form by Lawyer Davis, and date annexed, blind
Williams gave a crowning twang upon his harp (for I omitted to premise
that he brought it with him) and in a loud and solemn tone chanted
forth--FLOREAT!--when our hero (unwillingly I record it to his shame)
set up such a dismal and most dolorous howl, as startled all the
hearers, but most of all his grandfather, who, struck with horror, cried
out to the nurse--Take him away, take him instantly away! Why would you
let him roar at this unlucky moment?--Bless your honour, said the
prating gossip, ’tis a sign of strength--A sign! repeated the sage; how
should you know of what it is a sign? Away with him at once! I would it
had not happened.

As the cavalcade now marched away in solemn silence, Colonel Wilson,
halting on his wooden leg, whispered to Lawyer Davis, who was in the
rear--This is ridiculous enough, friend Davis, we must fairly confess;
but the harmless foibles of good and worthy men should not expose them
to our contempt.

Amongst the many oddities (for I am loth to call them absurdities) that
marked the character of Robert de Lancaster, his pride of pedigree was
one of the most prominent and most open to ridicule. That his friend
Colonel Wilson saw it in this light there is no doubt; yet although he
was quite intolerant enough towards many of Robert’s eccentricities upon
speculative points, in this favourite folly he left him undisturbed,
perceiving, as we may suppose, that it was a prejudice not to be
attacked but at the risque of his friendship. This topic therefore had
never come into discussion, and even the history of the picture, lately
brought out of obscurity, was, as we have before observed, new to the
incurious colonel. He had seen the pedigree unrolled for the first
time, but of its contents he knew no more than what his single question
about King Samothes had drawn from De Lancaster in the way of
explanation.

If Wilson acquiesced in this foible of his friend, none else amongst the
numbers, that were in habits of acquaintance with the family, were
likely to start any question as to the antiquity of it; they were so
cordially welcomed, and so hospitably entertained at Kray Castle, that
it would have been hard indeed upon their host, if they could have
swallowed nothing at his table but the dinner, that he put upon it. Add
to this, that the good old man was a patient listener to other people’s
anecdotes, though a deliberate narrator of his own. For all those
dealers in the marvellous, who are proverbially said to shoot a long
bow, he had a great deal of companionable fellow-feeling, and as he did
not hold the commonly received opinions of the world in very high
respect, he had boldly put together and amassed a curious and elaborate
collection, somewhat after the manner of Coryat, of what he styled his
_Confutations of vulgar Errors_. These have come under the inspection of
some people since his death, and though it must be owned that they are
not to be read without some few grains of allowance, yet there is a
sufficiency of novelty to make them entertaining, and good sense enough
interspersed to render them in a certain degree respectable.

He there paradoxically asserts, (and I must believe it was his serious
opinion, for he was fond of repeating it amongst his intimates) that the
human understanding had been extremely narrowed and contracted, since
the art of printing had been discovered and carried into practice, for
that tradition was the mother of memory, and book-reading the murderer.
For modern history he had a sovereign contempt; he said it was a mass of
voluntary misrepresentations, and that no man could be trusted to write
the annals of his own time; strenuously contending, that it was from the
dark ages only we could strike out light to illuminate mankind. In the
early writers of the history of his own country he was profoundly
versed, and could adduce a host of authorities to prove that _Dominicus
Marius Niger_ and _Berosus_ were clearly warranted in their affirmations
that the island of Great Britain was as well and as fully stocked with
inhabitants long before the days of Noah, as any other country upon the
face of the globe.

Upon all these topics Wilson had not much to say: he knew his friend was
in the habit of disputing points, which others took for granted, and
taking many for granted, which by others were disputed; he was therefore
well contented to let him talk his fill so long as he was only talking
for fame, resolved on his own part to take no more for truth than he saw
fit; and, being always able to prove what he himself asserted, what he
heard asserted without proof he did not hold himself always bound to
believe.

He now perceived the time was come, when it would be no longer in his
power to parry the propensity so discoverable in his friend on this
occasion to treat him with a discussion on the antiquity of his family:
he was prepared to meet it, nay, he was just now disposed even to invite
it by some leading questions respecting the family bards, and the
authenticity of the facts by them recorded.

This was every thing that De Lancaster could wish for: it was at once a
salvo for his vanity, and a challenge to his veracity. Assuming
thereupon a more than ordinary degree of solemnity, he said--It is not
to the bards alone that I am indebted for all I know of those, who have
borne my name before I was in the world, though much is due to their
correct and faithful records of the times they lived in. By my own
perseverance in keeping hold of the clue, which, by the help of _Joannes
Bodinus_, _Franciscus Tarapha_, _Wolfangus Lazius_, and other equally
illustrious authorities, hath led me to the fountain head of my
genealogy, I have at this moment the consolation to reflect, that when
that most incomparable personage Samothes, (first son of Japhet, who was
third son of Noah) was monarch, patriarch and legislator of this my
native island, I had an ancestor then living in it, who shared the
blessings of his government, was also nearly allied to him, and stood so
high in his favour and confidence, as to be appointed president and
chief teacher of theology in that celebrated college of philosophers
called Samothei, which both _Aristotle_ and _Secion_ affirm to have been
established in the days of this good king, and so called in honour of
his name: but not this school only, the whole island took its name after
this excellent king, and was for a course of years, till the arrival of
Albion, called Samothea, as both the learned _Bale_ and _Doctor Caius_
concur in affirming--but perhaps to you, Colonel Wilson, these anecdotes
may be uninteresting; and, if so, I will pass them over.

By no means, my good friend, replied the colonel, for be assured that
all these family facts, which you have collected, and Moses in his
history seems to have overlooked, are to me perfectly new and extremely
entertaining.

Sir, resumed the narrator, Samothes was succeeded by his son Magus, from
whom the Persian Magi derive--(Wilson arched his eye-brows, as men are
apt to do on certain occasions)--and Sarron succeeded Magus, from whom
were derived a sect of philosophers amongst the Celtes, called
Sarronides. In the reign of Druis, continued De Lancaster, or, as
_Seneca_ writes it, Dryus, (which I take to be a corruption) my
ancestors transplanted themselves, together with the philosophers,
named after their sovereign Druids, into the isle of Anglesea, which, as
_Humphry Lloyd_ truly observes, was their chief place of abode, or, more
properly speaking, their pontifical headquarters. Bardus, the son of
Druis, succeeded to his father, and in his reign so famous was my then
existing ancestor for his performances on the harp, that we have ever
since borne that instrument by royal grant of this king as our family
coat of arms and crest. Now, let it be observed, added he, that many
families have coats of arms and crests, and can’t tell how they came by
them.

That is true, said the colonel, and one of those am I; but I beg pardon
for interrupting you: I pray you to proceed.

After a period of three hundred and ten years, the Celtes being subdued
by Albion the giant, and this island subjected to his dominion, he
changed its name of Samothea to that of Albion. This same Albion the
giant was, as every body knows, the fourth son of Neptune--

I am proud to hear it, cried the colonel, but I protest to you it is the
first I ever heard of him, or any of his family: I can now account for
our superiority in naval affairs; and I most heartily hope that the
trident, which this son of Neptune inherited from his father, shall
never in any time to come be wrested from his posterity of this island.

I hope not, replied De Lancaster; but I proceed with my narrative--Upon
the landing of Brute with his Trojans, (which was not above three
thousand years ago) I find it asserted by _Master Henry Lyte of
Lytescarie_, that this island was no better than a rude and barren
wilderness, _ferarum altrix_, a nursery for wild beasts, as he
slightingly denominates it; but I must take leave to tell that learned
antiquary, that his history, which he proudly styles _The Light of
Britain_, might more properly be called The Libel upon Britain; for I
will neither give credit to his lions, which he presumes to say overran
the island, nor implicitly acquiesce in his monstrous white bulls, with
shagged manes and hairy foreheads, forasmuch as I find no mention of
them in our King Edward the First’s letters to Pope Boniface, wherein
this very point of the landing of Brute in Albion is very learnedly
discussed. As for his lions, I treat that fable with contempt, for,
besides that King Edward does not mention them, I will never believe
there could have been one in the whole island, else how came King
Madan, the grandson of this very Brute, to be killed and devoured by
wolves in a hunting match, when it has been notorious from all time,
that the wolf will fly from the hunter, that has anointed himself with
lion’s tallow? Will any man suppose that the royal sportsman could have
failed taking that obvious precaution, had there been but a single ounce
of the fat of that animal in the whole kingdom?

Nobody will suppose it, said Wilson, and I am satisfied there were no
lions for the reason you assign: I must beg leave to doubt also if there
was any authority for his enormous white bulls, provided you are quite
sure that King Edward does not hint at them in his correspondence with
the Pope: but have we not lost sight of your ancestors amongst these
lions and the bulls?

Not so, replied De Lancaster, for upon the partition, which Brute made
of the kingdom between his three sons Locrine, Camber and Albanact, my
family is found in the Cambrian district upon the very spot, where Kray
Castle now stands; which will warrant me in saying without vanity that
few land-holders in the island can boast a longer tenure in their
possessions, this being not above sixty-six years after the taking of
Troy, and eleven hundred thirty and two years before the Christian æra.

That is quite sufficient, said the colonel: few post-diluvian families
can produce a better title.




CHAPTER VII.

_The Narrative is interrupted by the Arrival of a Letter from old Morgan
of Glen Morgan._


It is not always the greatest misfortune, that can befal the listener to
a long story, if the teller shall chance to be called off in the middle
of it. This was just now the case with Robert De Lancaster, who had
advanced in his narrative but a very few years on this side of the
Trojan war, when the arrival of the servant, whom he had dispatched with
his letter of congratulation to old Morgan of Glen-Morgan, cut him short
in his progress, and it probably required as much philosophy on his part
to command his patience, as it did on Wilson’s to conceal his pleasure.

However this might be, De Lancaster upon the receipt of Morgan’s answer
to his letter, came to an immediate pause in his story, and leaving
about three thousand years of his pedigree as yet unaccounted for, read
as follows--

            “Dear Sir,

     “Your servant duly delivered your kind letter, informing me, that
     my daughter Mrs. Philip De Lancaster was safely delivered of a son;
     an event, which I hope will afford much consolation to you, and be
     the happy means of delivering down to future generations a name,
     which from time immemorial has been highly respectable in these
     parts.

     “To my name as one of the sponsors at the christening you have an
     undoubted right, and I am flattered that you enforce it; but of my
     personal attendance upon that solemnity there is I fear but little
     chance; for I am a victim to the gout, and though the snow, which
     now lies on the hills, may disappear before the month is out, I
     cannot expect my pains will be in the like melting mood: but He,
     who is the disposer of all things, will dispose even of such a
     wretched insignificant as I am.

     “Alas! my good brother-in-law, I am not like you a healthy, gay and
     social man; I am gloomy, sullen and uncomfortable; hypochondriac by
     nature, and splenetic by vexation and disease: I will not say that
     I repent that ever I was a father; that would be wrong; but I do
     say, that, being a father, I repent of my unfitness, and am
     conscious of my errors.

     “One only child, whom we jointly call our daughter, was all that
     Providence entrusted to me: her mother died when she was an
     infant, and I never ventured on a second marriage. I did not seek
     for teachers to instruct me how to educate my child: I took that
     task upon myself, and was her only master: I coveted not to
     accomplish her as a fine lady; I studied to implant good principles
     in her heart, and make her an honest, honourable woman. I suspect
     my discipline was too rigid, for I totally overlooked amusement,
     and fixed a melancholy upon her spirit, accompanied with so
     absolute a submission to my dictates, that she seemed to think and
     act without any will or option of her own.

     “When you tendered to me your alliance, I embraced it with ardour;
     for I held your character then, as I do to this day, in the highest
     honour and respect. Had ambition been my ruling passion, I could
     have looked up to nothing in point of family of superior dignity;
     had avarice been my vice, how could I have gratified it more than
     by marrying my daughter to the only son and heir of De Lancaster?
     Your son was comely, courteous, unassuming, and though perhaps not
     prominently marked with any brilliant gleams of genius, yet
     certainly in moral purity no young man bore a more unblemished
     character. I recommended the connection to my daughter--warmly,
     anxiously recommended it--Implicitly, without appeal, in a concern
     the most material she accorded to my wish, and answered at the
     altar to the awful question there repeated as compliantly as she
     did, when I first proposed it to her.

     “Now, sir, when I disclose to you that this too duteous creature
     had conceived a passion, which under the terror of my authority
     she had not courage to discover, judge what my sorrow and remorse
     must be. I have, though unintentionally, made a wreck of her peace,
     and endangered that of your son. I may have brought into your
     family a wife without a heart for her husband, and a mother, (which
     Heaven avert!) without natural affection for her offspring.

     “Thus I have laid the sorrows of my soul before you, and beseech
     you, that, with the candour and benignity, which are natural to
     you, you would look upon my child, and without revealing my secret
     to your son, influence him to be mild with her, in her present
     situation more especially; and this I am confident will engage her
     gratitude, though I dare not promise if will gain her love.

     “I was about to conclude with my love and blessing to the mother
     and her babe, but upon reading over what in the confusion of my
     thoughts I have so ill put together, I find I have omitted to tell
     you, who the young man is, of whom I have been speaking. His name
     is Jones, a gentleman by birth, but destitute of fortune. He was
     ensign, and on a recruiting party at Denbigh, where I noticed him
     for his modest manners and engaging person; having withal known his
     father Colonel Jones, and served with him in the same regiment when
     I was in the army, I invited this youth to make my house his
     quarters, became very fond of him, and furnished him with means to
     purchase a lieutenancy. I have nothing to charge him with; his
     conduct towards my daughter was honourable in the extreme, and I am
     informed that it was his punctilious delicacy towards me as his
     patron, that occasioned him to secede, when she probably would have
     summoned resolution to have laid the state of her heart before me;
     which had she done, if I know myself, I know she would have had her
     lover, and Jones would have had my estate.

              I have the honour to be,
                    Dear Sir, &c. &c.
                             JOHN MORGAN.”

The perusal of this melancholy letter made a deep impression on the
feeling heart of De Lancaster: he pondered on its contents for some
time, and began to arrange his thoughts for answering it in a
consolatory manner. When he had written a few lines, he laid down his
pen, and said within himself--How much better might all this be stated
face to face in person than upon paper! He is ill, poor man, and unable
to come to me; I am in health, and will go to him; he cannot fail to
take my visit kindly, and the face of a friend is cheering, when the
spirits are depressed. I will act towards him, as I, in his
circumstances, should wish and expect him to act towards me. It is but
about four hours drive, and I can be home the next morning: if the roads
are passable, ’twill be a pleasant jaunt, for the weather is now fine,
and promises a fair day to-morrow.

Having settled this point to his kind heart’s content, the good man rang
his bell, and summoned his servant, who had been to Glen-Morgan, to make
his report of the roads.

Were they practicable for the coach to pass with safety? The coach
might pass in perfect safety, for though the snow laid on the
mountains, the road was clear, and he saw no danger. The report was
satisfactory; the servant was dismissed, and the coachman summoned: upon
enquiry made as to matters within his department, every thing thereunto
appertaining, horses and carriage, were ready for the start. Cecilia was
now called into council, and the important project was announced to her:
It occasioned some surprise to her at first on account of its uncommon
spirit and vivacity, but she gave it no opposition, nor even moved the
previous question--The kindness of the motive, and care for her dear
father’s safety, occupied her gentle thoughts:--Were the roads safe, and
would he go alone? The roads were safe, and as he wished to have some
private talk with his brother Morgan upon family affairs, he would go
alone, and return to her on the next day.

It was resolved: the grand affair was settled: the solemn fiat was
announced; the note of preparation was sounded through all the lower
regions of the castle, and echoed through the range of stables--Our
master goes to-morrow to Glen-Morgan, and will stay out a whole night!

When tidings of this extraordinary event were announced to Colonel
Wilson, he was in the common parlour, and had sate down to chess with
Mr. Philip De Lancaster, who took much content in that narcotic game, of
which however he scarce understood a single principle. Going to
Glen-Morgan, cried Wilson! this is news indeed: I am astonished.--I am
cheque-mated, said Philip; I cannot move a man.--By Heavens! but I am
moved with pleasure and surprise, exclaimed Wilson, to hear that your
good father meditates a visit to Glen-Morgan.--It is not above twenty
miles, said the other, and the coach is easy; he may sleep in it all the
way.--The devil he may, rejoined Wilson: You might as well expect the
coachman to fall asleep.--That is not impossible, said Philip, he is
very fat and drowsy. But now I think of it, I’ll go and angle for some
perch: I shall like to send my father-in-law a few fish of my own
catching.

Do so, cried Wilson: you can stand still and catch them.--With these
words he stumped out of the room, and turning into the library, where De
Lancaster was sitting--I come to congratulate you, said he, as he
entered, upon the resolution you have taken. It will warm the heart of
my old friend Morgan to be flattered with a visit from the man in all
the world he most esteems and honours.

If it will give him any pleasure, I shall not regret my pains.

It will, be assured, repeated Wilson. I have a letter from him by your
messenger full of sighs and groans: I don’t much heed them; for it is
his humour to deal in the dolefuls, and set himself off in the worst
light he can possibly devise: for instance, he tells me here, that his
temper, which was always execrable, is now worse than ever; and that he
is grown so touchy, that even the parson won’t trust himself to a hit at
backgammon with him. This is about as true as the account he gives of
his house-keeping, which I know is liberal to excess, but which he
represents as rascally in the extreme; pretending to say, that through
mere covetousness he has made a potatoe garden of his pleasure ground,
turned his coach-horses into the straw yard, and lowered the quality of
his Welch ale, till his servants are in mutiny, and his parishioners
consulting about hanging him in effigy.

Is all this true? De Lancaster asked.

Not any of it, Wilson replied. His poor neighbours are more disposed to
worship him in effigy, than to hang him. He may have planted his grounds
with potatoes, and turned his idle horses out to fodder, for I dare say
this hard winter has made havoc of his stores, as he tells me that he is
screwing up his farmers in revenge for their want of mercy to their
necessitous neighbours; but as for his covetousness, I give no credit to
that; on the contrary I happen to know that he has just now paid down
the purchase money of a company for a young officer in the line, in no
degree related to him, or indeed connected with him.

Is Jones the name of that young officer?

It is.

Gallant, glorious old man! How I reverence him for the action! How I
honour him for his benignity! I would go to do him service, or to give
him pleasure, though I were to walk thither on foot.

I perceive you know something of this Jones.

If you do perceive it, you will not need to be informed of it by me: and
now as I also perceive you are in the secret of my visit, I hope you
will consent to accompany me to-morrow, and then Cecilia’s mind will be
at rest.

To put her mind at rest, said Wilson, where would I not go? How
willingly then shall I accompany you upon a friendly errand to a worthy
man like Morgan!

Agreed! cried De Lancaster, and now I am in good humour with myself for
thinking and resolving on this visit.

Let me profit by your good humour then, rejoined the colonel with a
smile, and let me hear the remainder of your genealogy; for we have
turned our backs upon the Trojan war, and are drawing near to modern
history, when, according to your doctrine, truth becomes darkened, and
we get into the regions of deception; which I shall not be sorry for, as
I confess there is ever more amusement for me in a harmless pleasant
fiction, than in a dry uninteresting matter of fact.

What answer De Lancaster gave to this appeal will be found in the
following chapter.




CHAPTER VIII.

_The Narrative is resumed and concluded. A learned Lecture upon Harmony,
by which the unlearned hearer is not greatly edified._


Since you make so polite a tender of your patience, said De Lancaster,
to me, who have already put it to so hard a trial, I must resume my
narrative from the landing of Brute and his Trojans, when my ancestors
established themselves on this very spot, I do not say in this very
castle, under Camber, the second son of the aforesaid Brute.
Lud-Hurdibras was the grandson of Camber, and King Bladud was the son of
Hurdibras: he built, as is notorious to all the world, the city of
Bath, and was the projector of those salubrious baths, that _William of
Malmsbury_ would fain ascribe to Julius Cæsar, which I pronounce to be
an egregious anachronism, and you may take it _meo periculo_.

I take it at my own peril, said the colonel; for I have seen Bladud
himself with these very eyes standing centinel over the bath of his own
making, and I never met with any body hardy enough to dispute his title
to it.

Let it pass then! He was a benefactor to mankind by the institution of
those baths, and might have been more eminently so, had his opinion upon
the practicability of men’s flying in the air been established upon
experiment. I confess there is much plausibility in the project, but I
am also aware of some difficulties attending it, which merit
consideration. I do not say it may not be achieved, but I am not
prepared to recommend the undertaking to any friend, whose life is of
immediate consequence to his family.

It would be a famous lift, said the wooden-legged warrior, to people in
my mutilated predicament; and though I am not quite disposed to the
experiment myself, any body else, who is so inclined, will have my good
wishes.

That was exactly the language, cried De Lancaster, of King Bladud’s
courtiers, and the learned men of the time. They unanimously declared
that many notable discoveries might be struck out in astrology, which
was the reigning study of the day, if men would fly up high enough to
look after them; but they were not impatient to be amongst the first to
fly upon those discoveries. My ancestor however, who was then about the
person of the king, and an enthusiastic admirer of the sublime and
beautiful, went a step beyond them all, and actually contrived a very
ample and becoming pair of artificial wings, which in the judgment of
the very best mechanics then living promised all possible success to the
experiment. Upon their exhibition in presence of the sovereign and of a
committee specially appointed, so charmed was King Bladud with the skill
displayed in their construction, that he was graciously pleased to
authorize and empower the inventor himself to make trial of his own
pinions, with free leave to fly as far and as high as he saw fit, and to
perch at discretion wherever it might suit him, the chimney tops and
lattices of the chambers even of the maids of honour not excepted.

Happy man! cried Wilson; this was a roving commission of a most tempting
sort, and I hope your ancestor had too much gallantry to hesitate about
embracing it.

I beg your pardon, replied De Lancaster, my ancestor was not a man of
that forward character as to aspire to situations, that ought to be
above the ambition of a subject, but when this flattering offer was with
all becoming thankfulness most modestly declined, King Bladud himself
(as my ancestor no doubt foresaw) had the aforesaid wings fitted to his
royal shoulders; ascended the roof of the temple of Apollo (at that time
the loftiest edifice in the city of Troy-nouvant) and launching himself
into the air confidently, as became a prince so sagacious and
philosophical, committed his sacred person to the protection of Apollo
and the artificial supporters, which promised him so delicious an
excursion. Whether the fault was in the wings themselves, or in King
Bladud’s want of dexterity in the management of them, is not for me to
determine; but history puts it out of doubt that the attempt was fatal
to the adventurous monarch. He fell headlong on the steps of the temple,
(as you see in the picture fronting you) and was dashed in pieces in the
twentieth year of his reign, and the two hundred and twentieth from the
landing of Brute. All the world believed my ancestor a lost man, but
Lear, son of Bladud and heir to his kingdom, being a prince of a most
noble nature, and sensible to whom he was indebted for his so early
elevation to the throne, rewarded the artificer of his father’s pinions
by empowering him to affix them to his armorial bearing of the harp, and
from that hour to this the harp of the bard between the wings of Bladud
has been the proper and distinguishing shield of the De Lancasters, as
not only the records of the herald’s office, but the head of every spout
appertaining to the castle, can testify and evince.

The spouts alone would satisfy me, said the colonel, but the heralds and
the spouts together are authorities incontestible; but since you have
named Lear, I should wish to know if he is that very Lear, who,
according to the drama of our poet Shakespear, having parted his kingdom
between his two ungrateful daughters Gonerill and Regan, ran mad upon
the reflection of his own folly for having done it.

For his madness, replied De Lancaster, there is no authority. He
bestowed his eldest daughter Gonerill in marriage to Henuinus, Duke of
Cornwall, and Regan to Maglanus, Duke of Albania. His youngest daughter
Cordelia, who was justly his favourite, married Aganippus, prince of
Gallia, and succeeded to the crown at Lear’s death, being the first of
her sex, who had ever borne the title of queen absolute and governess of
Britain. After the decease of Aganippus she fell a victim to the malice
of her nephews Cunedagius and Morgan, sons of her unworthy sisters, and
being thrown into prison by them, died, after a reign of only five
years, by her own hand. The usurpers, who at first agreed to divide the
empire, soon rose in arms against each other, and Morgan was slain in
Cambria by Cunedagius, where the place of his death is yet called
Glen-Morgan, or Morgan’s Land, now in the possession of the friend, to
whom we meditate to-morrow’s visit.--But I am hastening to release you,
and conclude my narrative--The line of Brute, the Trojan, ended in the
year 3476 with Ferrex and Porrex, sons of old King Gorbodug, who swayed
the sceptre through a period of sixty and two years. During the whole
time of the Pentarchy, that took place upon the decease of the
abovenamed sons of Gorbodug, my family appear to have kept close in
their Cambrian retirement, till the reign of Mulmutius Dunwallo,
immediately subsequent to the Pentarchy. It was then that a learned
ancestor of mine assisted Mulmutius in compiling that incomparable code
of laws, which being turned into Latin from the British language by
Gildus Priscus, was in time long after translated into English by the
great King Alfred, and by him incorporated amongst his famous
statutes.--And now, my good friend, as I have always determined to have
nothing to do with modern history, I here wind up my long detail,
congratulating myself that those, from whom I trace my blood, had the
good sense to keep close in their quarters in Cambria upon the landing
of the Romans, never deigning to mix or intermarry either with them or
the Picts, who came with Roderic A. D. 73, or with the Saxons, who first
entered the land A. D. 390, or with the Danes in the time of Egbert,
much less with the Normans in a more recent period, but remained pure
and unadulterated from the days of Samothes, the grandson of Noah, to
the present moment, in which I have the honour of thanking you for the
attention, you have been pleased to bestow upon a detail, which I fear
has been extremely tedious and unentertaining to you throughout.

Assure yourself, my good sir, replied Wilson, that the attention I have
bestowed on your narrative has been amply repaid by the entertainment I
have received from it. You have given me a history of my native country,
which in many parts was perfectly new to me, and if it had had no
concern whatever with your genealogy, still it would have been
interesting to me, who have never thought, nor had the curiosity to
enquire, about the annals of a time so very distant. That you have
authorities for what you have narrated I cannot doubt, for I am sure you
are incapable of a voluntary fiction, which, if any such there is, must
rest with others, not with you. As for the gratification you may derive
from the persuasion, that you can trace your descent from the son of
Noah, and by consequence, through Noah, even from Adam himself, grace
forbid I should attempt to lessen it, persuaded as I am, that you have
too much consideration for Moses to enlist with the Pre-Adamites. At the
same time I am free to own, that my respect for you, being founded on
the virtues of your character, receives little addition from the
circumstances of your pedigree; let me not however be considered as an
abettor of plebean sentiments; I acknowledge a degree of prejudice for a
well-born gentleman, and so long as you display the wings of King Bladud
only on the shoulders of King Bardus’s harp, I look with respect upon
your ancient banners; and henceforward when blind David Williams shall
make your castle hall resound with his melodious harp, I shall recollect
with pleasure that you have not only a natural delight, but also an
hereditary interest, in that noble instrument. I am myself a lover of
music; but it is a love without knowledge, for I neither know the
practice, nor ever studied the theory of it. I like this tune, and I
can’t tell why; I don’t like that, and can assign no reason for it. If
music only creates surprise in me by the wonderful execution of a
performer, I scarcely wish to hear it above once; if it moves my
passions, and elicits (as it sometimes will) my tears, I could listen to
it, as I may say, for ever; no repetition can exhaust the charm. What
this is I cannot define, and for that very reason I suppose it to be
nature; for art admits of explanation, but there is no logic, that
applies to instinct.

This was an unlucky remark, and the colonel stepped a little out of his
natural character when he risqued it: had he kept clear of definitions,
and said nothing about instinct, he might have escaped a lecture on the
Harmonics, which now became unavoidable, and he heard himself addressed
as follows--

You discern correctly, my good colonel, as to effect, not so as to
cause. You say there is no logic, that applies to instinct; I say there
is no instinct, that applies to rationality: the brute creation is
submitted to it, and directed by it; man must not offer to degrade his
virtues, or defend his vices, by a reference to instinct: the plea of
impulse will not save the criminal; for there are no propensities, which
reason may not conquer. From what you tell me I perceive that you
understand as much of music as ninety-nine in a hundred, who affect to
profess it, and more than many, who profess to teach it, forasmuch as
you feel it: now as there can be no effect without a cause, depend upon
it, there is a reason why you feel exactly in the manner you describe,
and in no other, though to investigate that reason, and intelligibly
describe it to you, cannot be done without a more intimate knowledge of
the constituent properties and powers of music, than falls to many
people’s lot to attain. To descant upon these at present would take up
more time than either of us would perhaps find convenient to devote to
it. I will postpone it to a better opportunity, when I flatter myself I
shall be able to relate to you so many striking instances of the
astonishing powers of harmony, as will set that sacred science in a
stronger and a clearer light, than you may be as yet aware of. Believe
me, it is one of the sublimest studies, that the human faculties can
embrace. The systems, that have come down to us from the Greek and Roman
harmonists, as well as all that has been written by the moderns on that
subject, are above measure difficult, elaborate and recondite--

Then I shall never understand them, said the colonel, nor desire to have
any thing to do with them.

Pardon me! resumed De Lancaster: If leisure now served, I could give you
specimens of the pains I have taken in the way of illustration, not only
with the learned treatise of _Vincentio Galilei_, a noble Spaniard,
published in the year 1581, but also with the Satyricon of _Martianus
Capella_, as edited and illustrated by the celebrated Grotius in his
early years. Permit me to say that I could give you the scale, and mark
out to you the distinct semitones of _Quarlino_, _Giovanni Bardi_, and
_Pierro Strozzi_. This would be demonstration, that could not fail to
edify, and at the same time I would adduce such evidence, as should
prove to you that my ancestorial harp was the very prototype of that,
which _Epigonus_ of _Ambracia_ was said to have played upon with forty
strings, when he first taught the Sicyonian minstrels to lay aside the
plectrum, and employ their fingers in the place of it: when _Julius
Pollux_ therefore gives this new-constructed harp the name of Epigonium
in honour of Epigonus, it is a mere trick, after the custom of the
Greeks, to arrogate all originality to their countrymen, and defraud my
ancestor of his prior title to give name to his own invention. In like
manner I can detect their plagiarism, when they ascribe the invention of
the double-headed plectrum to Sappho, whilst I have models still in my
possession, that prove it to have been the very identical plectrum in
general use, when my ingenious ancestor struck out a better practice. I
am therefore very naturally interested to prevent my ancestorial harp
from being confounded with the seven-stringed lyre, ascribed by Homer to
Mercury, of which the testudo formed the sounding-board; much less would
I have it mistaken for that delineated by _Hyginus_ with crooked arms,
and least of all with the suspicious model in the museum of the Medici.

All this, my dear sir, said the colonel, I should be extremely delighted
with, were I capable of understanding it; but alas! how should I, who
was never accustomed to admire any thing above the crash of a regimental
band, comprehend a single word of what you have been saying to me? That
I am capable of preferring one tune before another is all I pretend to,
but to assign any reason for that preference is what I do not pretend
to.

Yet there is a reason, resumed De Lancaster, and that reason is not
inscrutable to all, because not enquired into by you. That _tones_ have
power over the human feelings will not be disputed; but tones have
different properties, and of course different operations: the one,
entire, full and legitimate _tone_ contains within itself a variety of
divisional parts, by the expression and application of which various
passions may be excited, and various effects produced. The full tone
may be resolved into the half-tone, or _hemitonium_; the half-tone into
the quarter-tone, or _diesis_; neither does its divisibility stop here,
for the diesis may be again resolved, first, into its proper
quarter-tone, or _tetartemoria_, which be pleased to observe, is also
called _enarmonios_; secondly, into its third of a tone, or
_tritemoria_, (which by the way is the true chromatique) and thirdly and
lastly, into a tone, which involves a third part of a full tone and half
a third, and this is called _hemiolia_--And now, my good friend, having
given you some insight into the various combinations and resolutions of
musical tones, according to the system of the Greek writers on the
harmonics, (which, though briefly stated, cannot fail to be perfectly
clear to your comprehension) I think I may trust you to discover the
reason, why certain modulations and assortments of tones are pleasing to
you, and others not. These are the elements of all harmony, and as you
are now fully possessed of the definition of them, you cannot possibly
find any difficulty in the application.

I am under no difficulty at all, cried the colonel, in finding out when
I am pleased, and that being the only discovery I have any concern in, I
will trouble you no further to explain to me why I am pleased, but take
your word for having given me the true reason, and be content.

Here the lecture ended as many lectures do: the expounder was perfectly
satisfied with the instruction he had imparted, and the disciple was
entirely reconciled to remain in ignorance of what he did not wish to
understand.

At this moment Cecilia opportunely entered the room, and the
recollection of Sir Owen’s proposal instantly occuring to her father, he
desired to have a little private talk with her, and Wilson on the hint
withdrew.




CHAPTER IX.

_The last in the Book. The Author presents Cecilia De Lancaster to his
Readers, and trusts that he exhibits no unnatural, or ideal, Character._


Cecilia De Lancaster, of whom I am about to speak, was now in her
twenty-ninth year, and three years younger than her brother Philip,
father of our hero John. I have already said, that, since her father
had been a widower, she had persisted in devoting her attention to him,
and to the superintendance of his household.

Convinced that she possessed his entire affection, and sensible that his
happiness in a great degree depended upon her, she had hitherto
withstood every overture for changing her condition. The harmony,
typified in her name, was realized in her nature: it was manifested and
expressed in every movement, every feature of her mind, her temper and
her person. Time, that had robbed her of the freshness of her bloom, had
repaid her by maturing and improving charms more permanent, endowments
more attractive. There was a smile, so characteristically her own, that
it was hard to conceive it could ever be bestowed without being felt,
and, such was her discernment, that perhaps it was very rarely bestowed
where it was not deserved. Her eyes were the genuine interpreters of her
heart: when turned upon the poor or afflicted, they melted into
compassion; when directed towards her friends, they glistened with
affection; when uplifted towards her God, their expression might be
called divine. Her voice came upon the ear like music--There is a
passage in a letter written by our hero to one of his friends, that
describes it in the following terms. “It is,” says he, “of so sweet a
pitch, that, whensoever it is heard, I am struck with wonder how it
comes to pass, that others do not tune their voices to it: for my own
part I may say, that my first efforts of articulation were instinctively
in unison with her tones; and therefore it is, that I have never
entered into argument with loud and boisterous speakers, or elevated my
voice to the annoyance of any man’s ears, since I have been admitted
into society.”

Such was Cecilia De Lancaster, who now in that sweet voice, which we
have been describing--(Oh that ye would imitate it, ye tuneless
talkers!) requested her father to impart to her his commands, not
unaware that they most probably referred to his interview with her
importunate admirer Sir Owen ap Owen, baronet, of Penruth Abbey.

This conjecture was soon confirmed by the recital, which her father now
gave of the baronet’s proposals; he stated them as advantageously for
the proponent, as the case would admit of: his family and fortune were
unexceptionable; he saw no objection to him on the score of temper; he
had the character of being a kind master, an easy landlord and a
hospitable neighbour: it must be owned that the good man was not
overstocked with wit or learning, but he had no conceit or
self-sufficiency to betray him into attempts, that might subject him to
ridicule: his pursuits were not above the level of his understanding, so
that upon the whole he thought his friend Sir Owen might pass muster
with the generality of country gentlemen.

I think of him, said Cecilia, exactly as you do; his pursuits are suited
to his understanding, and his manners are suited to his pursuits: these
are easily counted up, for they consist in little else but his hounds
and his bottle: I can partake of neither; my happiness centers in the
consciousness of possessing the good opinion and affection of my
beloved father: That blessing I enjoy at home; I need not run to Penruth
Abbey in pursuit of it; ’tis here, and ever present whilst I am with
you. As for Sir Owen’s addresses, he has repeated them so often for the
last five years, and has so constantly received the same answer, that I
must suppose he now compliments me with his proposal rather from habit,
than with any serious idea, that it can avail. As a neighbour I shall be
glad to see Sir Owen, even at the tea-table, provided he is sober, but
as a lover I hope to see no more of him, and I flatter myself I shall
not; especially should a certain lady arrive, whom I understand he is
expecting at the Abbey.

Upon De Lancaster’s asking who that lady was, Cecilia informed him that
she was the widow of his brother David, the Spanish merchant, lately
deceased. This lady she understood to be a native of Spain, and that she
was bringing with her from Cadiz a boy, the nephew of Sir Owen, and of
course presumptive heir to his estate and title. Judge then, added she,
if some address will not be employed by Mrs. Owen to keep her son in the
succession, and if my poor lover has nothing but his Welch wits to
oppose to her Spanish finesse, it is easy to conjecture what turn the
politics of Penruth Abbey are likely to take.

Well, cried the father, it was my part to make good my promise to Sir
Owen; it is your’s to decide upon his fate. This you have done, and I
may now say without scruple, you have wisely done; yet recollect my dear
Cecilia, we have as yet but this one infant in our stock, and I do not
expect that Mrs. De Lancaster will prove a very prolific mother.

I trust, replied Cecilia, that this fine boy will live, and then I shall
think Mrs. De Lancaster a very fortunate mother, though she may never
greet us with a second hope.

Heaven grant the child may live! exclaimed De Lancaster; devoutly I
implore it. But oh! my dear Cecilia, where is our stream of ancestry
alive but in yourself? In whose veins but in your’s does the ancient
current of our blood run pure? Look at your brother! _Look at the rock,
from which this child is hewn!_ Is there in that dead mass one spark of
native fire, one quickening ray of genius?--No; not one. Stampt with an
inauspicious name, he is of all the foregone Philips _Philippissimus_.
Look at the hapless mother of the babe! Has she a heart? I know she has
not that, which answers to the name: she had, but it is gone. Alas for
thee, poor babe! being so fathered and so mothered, child, from whom
can’st thou derive or heart or head--?

From you, his grandfather, replied Cecilia: Come, come, my dearest sir,
I’ll not allow of this despondency. Rise from your chair, and come with
me and visit this new scyon of your stock! Look in his lovely face;
contemplate the bright promise of a true De Lancaster, a virtuous hero,
born to crown your name with honour: See him! you’ll own how Providence
has blessed you, and blush for having doubted.

The father rose, took the hand of his daughter, and, whilst the tears
were brimming in his eyes, followed where she led.

Now, my friendly reader, if you have gone patiently along with me
through the pages of this my first book, let me hope that you will
proceed not unpleasantly to the conclusion of the next.

You know that every story must have time to expand itself: characters
must not be hurried into action before they are understood; and a novel,
though it ought to be dramatic, is not absolutely a drama.

My hero is yet in the cradle, and I must keep his grandfather and others
in the foreground, till he is fit to be presented to you: when that time
comes, old age may cease to prattle, philology may fall back and NATURE
step forward to conduct and close the scene.

In the mean time if I take the freedom of saying a few words, whilst the
fable pauses, recollect that I cannot in the course of nature have many
more opportunities of conversing with you, and few have been the
writers, with whom you have had more frequent intercourse, or who have
been more pertinaciously industrious to deserve your favour and esteem,
for I am now striving to amuse and edify even the youngest of my
readers, when I myself am short of fourscore years by less than four;
and I am inclined to believe, that the mere manual operation of writing
these pages, (as I am now doing for the third time with my own hand)
would be found task enough for any person of my age, without engaging in
the labour of inventing, or the risque of fathering them.

Be that as it may, the work is done, and done, not in the evil spirit of
the time, but without a single glance at any living character; conscious
therefore that I have not endangered what is sacred to me as a
gentleman, the critics are most cordially welcome to every thing they
can find about me as an author. However as I know some of them to be
fair and honourable gentlemen, I hope they will recollect how often I
have been useful to them in the sale of their publications, and assist
me now with their good word in the circulation of De Lancaster.


                        END OF THE FIRST BOOK.




                           BOOK THE SECOND.




CHAPTER I.

_A Country Visit according to the old Costuma._


By peep of day every thing, that had life, in and about Kray Castle,
horses, dogs and cats included, were up and in motion, save only the
lady in the straw, who could not rise, and the gentleman in bed, who did
not chuse to leave it, namely Philip the fisher, who had not got one
perch, and probably not so many _bites_ from beside the banks, as he had
been favoured with from between the blankets.

The two companions, who had pledged themselves to this adventure,
rendezvoused at the same moment, though not exactly under the same
colours; for whilst the scarlet of De Lancaster’s apparel was fiery
bright, the uniform of Wilson had a cast of the campagne in it, having
seen some service, and endured some smoke.

Amongst the numerous personages, who attended these adventurers to the
door of the vehicle, in which they embarked their bodies, our new-born
hero took a conspicuous post, probably more in compliment to the
curiosity of his nurse, than selfishly to gratify his own. Nevertheless
it is recorded, that when the machine, (called in those days a coach)
was put in motion by the joint energy of six fat coach-horses and one
fat driver, little John clapped his hands, and crowed amain for joy: if
he made any speech upon the occasion, there was one more instance of
miraculous prematurity lost to the world, for nobody remembered it.

Though the country they had to travel over was not quite so flat as
Norfolk, nor the road altogether like a gravel walk, yet the journey was
prosperous, for the team was strong, and a persevering amble, now and
then exasperated into an actual trot, brought the travellers within
sight of the mansion, embowered in yew-trees, where dwelt the descendant
of King Lear, father of a daughter less ambitious than Regan, but far
more dutiful.

A forerunner, who without trial of his speed, had outstripped the coach
by some miles, had announced the coming of the lord of Kray Castle, and
the fires in the old conventual kitchen sparkled at the news: the
drunken old warder had got on his fur gown, and the bard of the family
was ready in the gallery of the great hall to give the customary
salutation to so honourable a guest. When Mr. De Lancaster had passed
the abbey-like porch, and found himself in the aforesaid hall, he turned
round, and made a courteous inclination of his head to the harper, who,
like Timotheus, was _placed on high_: noticing the domestics and
retainers, who lined his passage to the receiving room, he said in a
whisper to his friend the colonel--These honest folks don’t look as if
they had suffered by a reduction either of the quantity or quality of
their Welch ale.--When ushered into the room, where the master of the
mansion was, they found him sitting in his gouty chair, with his foot
wrapped in flannel on a stool, in company with a great collection of
Morgans, who hung quietly by the wall: upon sight of De Lancaster his
countenance was lighted up with joy. This is kind indeed, he exclaimed;
this is an honour I could not expect, and a favour I shall never forget,
taking the hand of De Lancaster, and making an effort, as if to press it
to his lips. Turning to Colonel Wilson, he cried--Ah my old friend, I am
happy to see you. Welcome to Glen-Morgan! Why you look bravely, and are
nimbler upon one leg, than I am upon two: you see how I am suffering for
the sins of my youth.--He then called out amain for Mrs. Richards his
housekeeper; he might have spared himself the trouble, for Mrs. Richards
was in the room, and made herself responsible for well-aired beds,
reminding her master, who questioned her very closely, that Captain
Jones had lodged ten nights in the room, which she had prepared for Mr.
De Lancaster, and he had left Glen-Morgan that very morning: the same
good care had been taken of Colonel Wilson’s apartment. Satisfaction
being given upon these points, Mrs. Richards was strictly enjoined to
see that not an individual belonging to his worthy guest wanted for any
thing in his house, nay, if a dog had followed his coach, let it be her
duty to take care that he was welcomed and well fed.--These were the
manners, and such the primitive hospitality of those days.

When dinner was announced, and old Morgan, wheeled in his chair into the
eating-room, the parson in his canonicals at the foot of the table gave
his benediction to an abundant mass of steaming viands, which bespoke a
liberal rather than an elegant provider. A grave and elderly gentleman,
who had the health of the family under his care, pronounced a loud Amen
at the conclusion of the parson’s prayer, and the butler at the
sideboard bowed his head. The family lawyer was also present, having a
dinner retainer ad libitum, and a painter of no small eminence, who was
upon his tour for the purpose of taking sketches of back-grounds for his
portraits, completed the party.

Every guest at table had an attendant at his back in full livery of
green and red with boot-cuffs, on which the tailor of the household had
wantonly bestowed such a bountiful profusion of scarlet plush, that the
hand, which gave a plate, seldom failed to sweep away the bread beside
it, or the knife and fork, as it might happen: some discomposure also
occurred to the wearers of wigs, when a dish was put on or taken off
from the table. The harp would not have been silent, but that Mr. De
Lancaster observed, that the din of the table would probably be louder
than the melody of the serenade, and with much good reason suggested,
that it might be more respectful to the musician, not to call upon him
for his attendance till there was a better chance for hearing his
performance.

When the table at length was cleared, and the health of the new-born
heir had gone round, De Lancaster did not fail to call for the minstrel,
and Mr. Gryffin Gryffin made his entrance with his harp, habited in his
garb of office with his badge of merit pendant on his breast. After a
prelude, calculated to display his powers of execution, he paused to
know if it was the pleasure of the company to honour him with their
choice of any favourite melody; to this De Lancaster with his usual
courtesy made answer, that for himself he should much prefer to hear
some strain of Mr. Gryffin’s own composition, accompanied by the voice.
Gryffin bowed, and confessed that he had been employed upon a simple
melody of a pensive and pathetic cast, adapted to a few valedictory
stanzas, which Captain Jones, who had that morning departed from
Glen-Morgan to embark for the West Indies, had left upon his table,
purposely, as it should seem, to fall into his hands.--

By all means give us those! was the exclamation of more than one person
in the company.

The obedient minstrel again made a graceful reverence, and throwing his
hands upon his harp, sung as follows--

    “Hark, hark, tis the bugle! It wafts to my ear
    “The signal for parting--Adieu to my dear.
    “I go to the isles, where the climate is death,
    “And Fate’s pallid hand weaves my funeral wreath.

    “When I leave my soul’s treasure forlorn on the shore,
    “And I strain my sad eyes, till they see her no more,
    “My sorrows unheeded no pity shall move,
    “While my cold-hearted comrades cry--Why did you love?

    “A soldier, whose sword is his all, should obey
    “No mistress but Honor--and truly they say--
    “Behold! at her call, to my duty I fly;
    “Can a soldier do more for his honor than die?”

When Mr. Gryffin Gryffin had concluded his madrigal, of which the melody
at least was extremely well composed, the painter, who ought to have
been a better critic, than to have overlooked the effect, which it had
had upon the countenance of old Morgan, unadvisedly enquired who the
mistress of the poet was--A poet’s mistress, you may be sure, De
Lancaster instantly replied; every thing is imaginary; the mistress and
the muse are alike ideal beings, and death and dying are only put in to
make out the rhymes; then turning to the master of the table, he
said--Brother Morgan, I perceive you drink no wine; I have had my glass,
and if the company will excuse us, you and I old fellows will leave them
to their claret, and take a cup of coffee tete à tete in the next room.

The motion was seasonable, and so immediately seconded by the man of
medicine, that the mover and the man to be moved soon found themselves
in a situation equally well adapted to the compassionate object of the
one, and the seasonable relief of the other.

Here as soon as they had taken their seats, and were left to
themselves, De Lancaster commenced his lecture _De consolatione_. On
this occasion it so happened, that a fair opportunity was not made use
of, for, except a slight hint at Cicero and his daughter, very little
philology or common-place argument were resorted to: common sense was
found upon trial to answer all purposes quite as well: when the one
lamented that he had not discovered his daughter’s attachment, the other
very naturally demanded, who but the lady was to be blamed for that?
Where there was such a flagrant want of confidence on the part of the
daughter, and no compulsion on that of the father, by what kind of
sophistry could he suggest occasion for any self-reproach?--To this when
Morgan answered, that he feared his daughter had been awed into
concealment, De Lancaster sharply replied, that he defied him to assign
any honourable motive for a disingenuous action: a father could only
recommend the situation, which he thought most eligible and advantageous
for his child, presuming that she had not previously engaged her heart;
in which if he was deceived by her, it only proved that either he was
very unsuspecting, or she extremely cunning. In conclusion Morgan was
driven to confess that his only remaining compunction arose from the
reflection upon what Mr. Philip De Lancaster might suffer by a
connection, so little likely to promote his happiness.

If that be your regret, resumed De Lancaster, dismiss it from your mind
at once. Philip is made at all points for your daughter: no couple can
be better paired. Fondness on either side would destroy their mutual
tranquillity. They have given us, under Providence, a grandson, and if
that blessing be continued to us, you and I must agree to regard the
intermediate generation as a blank, and rest our only hope on what that
child may be.

Heaven grant him life, cried Morgan! You have cured me of the mournfuls.
Let us join our friends.




CHAPTER II.

_Robert De Lancaster returns to Kray-Castle. Another Visit is in
Meditation._


As the porter, who lays down his burden and his knot, has probably a
quicker sense, and greater relish for the pleasure, which that
relaxation gives, than the gentleman, who never carried any thing
heavier than the coat upon his back, so did it fare with the good old
lord paramount of the manor of Glen-Morgan. He was just now the lightest
man in the company, forasmuch as he had got rid of a heavy wallet of
vexations, and in the gaiety of his heart, he declared, that as for any
pain the gout could give (which in fact at that very moment gave no pain
at all) he regarded it as nothing: a man was not to flinch and make wry
faces at a little twinge of the toe, when he had a gallant officer in
his eye, who had undergone the amputation of a leg.

Yes, said the colonel, I have lost one leg; I should not like to lose
another; but in our way of life we must take things as they turn out;
considering how often I have heard the bullets whistle, I think myself
well off.

I perceive, cried the painter, it is your right leg, colonel, which you
have lost: the misfortune I should think would have been greater, had
you been deprived of your right arm.

So the world would think, sir, replied the colonel, had it been your
case; but we poor soldiers sometimes want our legs to save our lives.

Your wounds sometimes, said De Lancaster, will save your lives: the
scars, that Caius Marius bore about him, rendered his visage so
terrible, that the assassinating soldier did not dare to strike him.--I
have painted him in that very crisis, replied the artist; but I confess
I have trusted to his natural expression, and left out the scars.--You
have done right as a painter, rejoined De Lancaster; an historian is
tied down to facts.

After an evening, passed in conversation, cheerful at least, though
little worth recording, and a night consumed in sleep, of which no
record can be taken, Robert De Lancaster rose with the sun, and, after
about five hours travel, was set down in safety with his friend the
colonel at his castle door, where Cecilia met him with a smiling
welcome, and a happy report, that all was well. This report was in a few
minutes after confirmed by Mr. Llewellyn, who had the health of the lady
above stairs under his care. Mr. Philip also presented himself, and our
hero John, (though last and least) exhibited his person, and seemed
perfectly well satisfied with the reception, that was given him.

Llewellyn was a man of information, and had a spirit of enquiry, by
which he became to the full as deep in the secrets of the families he
visited, as in those of the medicines he administered. To Sir Owen at
all times, sick or well, he had free access, and he paid him more than
professional attendance: he now brought the news of Mrs. David Owen’s
arrival at Penruth Abbey. He had seen her, and being as usual in a
communicative vein, he proceeded to launch out into many of those
trivial particulars, which are of easy carriage, and with which
gentlemen of his vocation are apt to enrich their conversation to the
great edification and amusement of their employers.

Mr. Llewellyn would not positively pronounce Mrs. David Owen to be a
beauty, yet he was aware that many people would call her pretty; she was
not however to his taste: there was a want of sensibility and a certain
delicacy of expression, which in his conception of the female character
(and here he addressed himself to Cecilia) was the very _crisis_ of all
that is charming in woman.

You mean _criterion_, my friend, said De Lancaster, but you are _in the
shop_, and there errors are excepted; so go on; proceed with your
description.

Mr. Llewellyn was too well accustomed to these little rubs to be daunted
by them, and finding that he had gained attention, proceeded to describe
Mrs. Owen as a sprightly little woman of a very dark complexion, with an
aquiline nose, quick sparkling eyes and thick arched eyebrows, black as
the raven’s plume: Mr. Llewellyn professed himself no admirer of black
hair; (Cecilia’s was light brown). Her dress, he said, was after the
fashion of the Spanish ladies, as he had seen them represented on the
London stage, when _he walked the hospitals_.--Here Mr. Llewellyn made
another slip, but it was out of De Lancaster’s reach, who had no data
for a comment.--He acknowledged that her style of dress was well
calculated to set off her shape, and display the elegance of her taper
limbs to the best advantage: he would have the company be prepared to
encounter the sight of bare elbows and short petticoats; for his own
part he was no friend to either. She had taken up her guitar at Sir
Owen’s desire, and sung two or three of her Spanish airs, accompanied by
certain twanging strokes on that instrument, which, though it resembled
nothing that could be called playing, had however no unpleasing effect.
She sung in a high shrill tone, and accompanied the words, which he did
not understand, with certain looks and gestures, which he did not wish
to describe.

Their melodies are Moorish, said De Lancaster; they use a great deal of
action when they sing: the Greeks themselves did the same. Does Mrs.
David Owen speak English?

With great fluency, but with a foreign accent. She had her son with her,
about four or five years old, the very picture of herself; extremely
forward, cunning and intelligent beyond what could be expected from a
child of his age. Sir Owen had been rather disconcerted and thrown out
of his bias by his visitors on their first arrival; but he had now
acquiesced, and the lady seemed to have the game in hand. Mr. Llewellyn
concluded by declaring, that if he had not been told she was a Spaniard,
he should verily have suspected her to be a Jewess.

Whether she be Jewess or Christian, said the master of the family, we
must pay her the compliment of a first visit, and without delay.

The next morning, as soon as the sun appeared upon the eastern hills,
and gave the promise of a fair day, order of march was given out for the
afternoon; dinner was announced for an early hour, and again the
body-coach set out with De Lancaster and Cecilia occupying the seat of
honour, and Philip with his back to the great front glass, followed by
two reverend personages grey-headed, and in no respect resembling light
horsemen, save only that they carried arms before them, though not in
holsters of the newest military fashion. The elegant simplicity of
Cecilia’s dress very happily contrasted the splendid drapery of the old
gentleman, who had relieved the scarlet coat, not in the happiest
manner, with a waistcoat of purple satin, richly embroidered with gold,
and not much exceeded by the coat in the length of its flaps, or the
capaciousness of its pockets. Philip was by no means over-studious of
the toilette. Colonel Wilson had gone home to receive his son Edward,
who was now elected off from Westminster school to Trinity College in
Cambridge.




CHAPTER III.

_The Visit to Penruth Abbey. Certain Personages, who will fill
conspicuous Parts in this eventful History, are introduced to our
Readers._


As the cumbrous machine, to which the family of the De Lancasters had
now committed their persons, disdained the novelty of springs, it was
well for the company within that it was provided with a soft lining of
blue velvet and enormous cushions, stuft with swan’s down. It had been
the admiration of the county, when its owner served the office of
sheriff about twenty years past, and though its original splendour was
somewhat faded, it still exhibited on its pannels a vast shield
emblazoned with the device of the harp between a copious expanse of
wings. When it turned the point of the avenue leading to Penruth Abbey,
looming large as an Indiaman in a fog off Beachy Head, it was readily
descried by the porter from his lodge, who, huddling on his tufted gown
of ceremony, rung out the signal on the turret-bell; whereupon all the
waitingmen, drunk or sober, ranged themselves in the hall, and old Robin
ap Rees prepared himself to salute the respected visitor with a
flourish on the harp, as he entered the house.

Robert De Lancaster, followed by his son and daughter, passed through
the domestic files to the tune of Shenkin, and was received at the door
of the saloon by Sir Owen, who presented his sister-in-law in due form,
making her reverences in the style and fashion of Spain, where the
ladies bow, and the men curtsey.

The good old man acquitted himself with all the gallantry of the good
old court, and took his seat with due respect and ceremony beside the
lady. When he had adjusted the tyes of his perriwig and the flaps of his
coat, having drawn off his high-topped gloves to give a due display to
his ruffles, Mrs. Rachel Owen began the conversation by telling him how
much she admired his equipage, which she complimented by saying it was
exactly upon the model of the coaches of the Spanish nobles: the English
carriages, she observed, were generally very ill constructed and in a
bad taste, particularly those she travelled in, drawn by only two
beggarly horses, unmercifully whipped by a brat of a postillion; whereas
in her country no man of distinction could pass from place to place
without his six mules, guided by the voice, unincumbered by either reins
or harness, and ornamented with bells, which in her opinion gave a
cheerful sound, and had a very dignified effect.

Why yes, madam, said De Lancaster, every country is attached to its own
customs. The Spaniard prefers his mule, the Laplander his rein-deer, the
inhabitant of the desart his camel, and some tribes bordering upon
Abyssinia ride their cows. The animals no doubt are adapted to their
several climates: in England we are contented with horses, and as our
vehicles are apt to have a great deal of iron-work about them, we are
satisfied with the jingling they make, and readily dispense with the
amusement of bells.

He then proceeded to pass some high encomiums on the beauty and majesty
of the Castilian language, which he said he could read and understand,
when spoken, though he was not able to keep up a conversation in it. He
remarked upon the excellence of their proverbs, which he said was a
proof both of the fecundity and antiquity of a language. She
acknowledged the justness of his remark, and instanced the romance of
Cervantes as abounding in proverbs. She believed they were frequent in
the Hebrew language, and asked him if they were also common in the
Greek.

Very much so, madam, replied De Lancaster, in the writings of the
Greeks. As to the Hebrews, the wise sayings of Solomon alone furnish a
very copious collection, and are by us specifically called his
_Proverbs_, or as the Greeks would term them his _Paræmiæ_, which some
express by the word proverb, following Cicero’s interpretation; others
by the word adage, preferring the authority of Varro, the most learned
of all the Roman philologists.

The lady, who had drawn this conversation upon herself by an affectation
of talking about what she did not understand, now perceiving the eyes of
the company directed towards her, and a general silence kept whilst De
Lancaster was speaking, felt her vanity so much flattered by having
this learned harangue addressed to her, that, in order to hold it on,
she ventured to ask which of the Greek authors were most famous for
their proverbs.

Madam, replied De Lancaster, your question, though extremely pertinent
for you to ask, is not easy for me to answer with the precision I could
wish. I can only tell you that the Greek oracles were in general adages,
and many of the latter are to be traced even in Homer: the bulk of them
however is to be collected from Aristotle the Peripatetic, and his
disciples Theophrastus and Clearchus of Irlöe, from Chrysippus,
Cleanthes, Theætetus, Aristides, Aristophanes, Æschylus, Mylo,
Aristarchus, and many others, that do not just now occur to me to name
to you.

These are great authorities indeed, cried Mrs. Owen, more and more
delighted with the conversation as it grew more and more unintelligible
to her; and pray, learned sir, added she, condescend to inform me where
the wise sayings of these great men are to be met with.

De Lancaster was not a man to withhold his answer from any question upon
a point of philology, could any such have been put to him by his
cook-maid; whereas Mrs. Owen had fairly hooked him in to believe that
she was interested in his discourse, and solicitous to be informed.
Possessed with this opinion, he replied--Madam, every question that you
put to me is a convincing proof, that the ladies in your country turn
their minds to studies, in which our English women have no ambition to
be instructed (a conclusion falser than which he never made in his
life) and it is with particular satisfaction I have the honour to inform
you, that in Zenobius the sophist, or (as some will have it) Zenodotus,
in Diogenianus of Heraclea, and in the Collectanea of Suidas, you will
find ample store to gratify your very laudable curiosity: I would
recommend to you also to consult Athenæus, Stobæus, Laertius, Michael
Apostolius the sophist, Theophrastus called Logotheta, and others, that
might be pointed out; but for the present perhaps these may suffice.

I dare say they will, cried Sir Owen, and if you find them in this
house, sister Rachel, I’ll give you leave to keep them. Lord bless you,
my good neighbour, she never heard the name of one of them, nor is there
a monk in all Spain, that ever did put a word of theirs under his cowl,
or ever will. I tell you they are as dull as asses, and as obstinate as
mules. Rachel knows no more of what you have been saying to her than I
do.

This side speech of the baronet’s, so unseasonably true, had scarce
passed his lips, when little David bolted into the room, and having
fixed his piercing eyes upon the person of De Lancaster, ran up to his
mother, and in a screaming voice cried out--Look, look, mamma, there’s a
man in a black wig, for all the world like our old governor of
Cadiz!--Hush, hush, saucy child, cried the mother, stopping his mouth
with her hand.--Don’t stop him, I pray you, said the good man; when
children find out likenesses, ’tis a proof that they make observations.
Your son compares me to the governor of Cadiz, and I dare say I am
honoured by the comparison.

That is true politeness, said Mrs. Owen, addressing herself respectfully
to De Lancaster. It is not often that great learning and great urbanity
are found in the same person: when they are, how infinitely they adorn
each other!--a reflection this, so much to the honour of Mrs. David
Owen, that lest I may not have many to record equally to her credit, I
am the more inclined to notice it upon this opportunity.

Addressing herself to Mr. Philip De Lancaster, she said--I take for
granted, sir, you are extremely fond of the beautiful infant, of which I
am to give you joy--Philip bowed and made no answer.--I hear, repeated
she, he is an uncommon fine boy--Philip was of opinion that all infants
were alike: for his part he could mark no difference between
them--Perhaps you have not studied them with quite so much attention as
you have given to your books--Philip was not very fond of reading--Of
country sports perhaps--Still less--Of planting, farming, building?--Not
in the least of either--Mrs. Owen seemed resolved to find his ruling
passion--Did he take pleasure in the wholesome exercise of walking?--He
doubted if it was wholesome, and he never walked, if he could avoid it:
he angled now and then, and had no dislike to a game of chess--I
comprehend you now, said the inquisitive lady; fishing is an amusement,
that accords with meditation, and chess demands reflection and a fixt
attention--I give little or no attention to it, replied Philip; and that
may be the reason, why I never win a game--That certainly may be the
reason, resumed the lady, and I’m persuaded you have struck upon it.

The conversation now took a general turn. Tea was served, and the black
prying eyes of Rachel Owen were at leisure to scrutinize the dress and
person of Cecilia, whom the baronet seemed now disposed to release from
all further solicitation. Master David Owen in the mean time amused
himself with teazing a poor little Spanish lap-dog, which, but for him,
would have quietly reposed its diminutive body in his mother’s muff.
When reprimanded by Sir Owen for tormenting a dumb creature, he set his
nails with a most inveterate resolution into the little creature’s tail,
and to his infinite delight convinced the hearers, that he had no dumb
creature between his fingers. This produced a slight box on the ear
from his uncle, and the yell of the suffering dog was instantly
overpowered by the louder yell of the enraged tormentor--Poor fellow,
said Mrs. Owen, you shall play with little Don when your uncle is not
present: boys must be amused; must they not Mr. De Lancaster?--Not with
cruelty I should hope, he replied; they ought not to be indulged in that
amusement; and it is a very bad prognostic, when they can be amused by
it--The dog is of little value to me, said Mrs. Owen, and I would sooner
wring his nasty neck off with my own hands, than he should annoy my
brother Owen, and expose my darling boy to be punished by him.

The dog, madam, said the old gentleman with a gravity, that was highly
tinctured with displeasure, the dog may be of little value, but humanity
is of the highest; and a more sacred lesson cannot be impressed upon
the mind of your son, whilst it is yet capable of receiving the
impression. Permit me also to observe to you that no lady wrings off the
neck of a dog with her own hands: we should view it as an act of
violence so totally out of character, that I must doubt if she ever
could recover it--I will not suppose that a poor little animal could
provoke your anger, because it cried out when it suffered pain, and your
son excite your pity, when he cried out louder, and suffered nothing.

I am obliged to you, my good friend, cried Sir Owen, that is just what I
would have said, if I could--Rachel Owen said nothing, but answered with
a look, that I am neither able nor ambitious to describe. In that moment
vanished her respect for De Lancaster, and something was adopted in its
stead of a less innocent and gentle quality. She took her sulky sobbing
brat by the hand, and left the room without apology. The coach was
announced, and De Lancaster rose to take his leave--You see how it is
with me, said Sir Owen; I have admired an angel, and henceforth renounce
all hope of her: such a whelp and such a shrew, as I am now coupled to,
will shortly make an end of me.

De Lancaster shook his friend by the hand, walked silently through the
hall to his coach, which conveyed him home in safety, time not having
sufficed for the fat coachman to get more than three parts tipsy, and
the fat horses being, as was usual with them, perfectly sober and
acquainted with the road.




CHAPTER IV.

_The Family of De Lancaster return to Kray-Castle. Our History mends its
Pace._


De Lancaster and his daughter, meditating on the occurrences, that had
passed at their visit, particularly on the expressions, that had fallen
from Sir Owen upon their taking leave, observed a profound silence for
some time after they had left the Abbey. Philip’s thoughts did not in
any degree harmonize with their’s, for he was ruminating on the charms
of Mrs. Owen, and, as the coach was slowly moving up a steep ascent,
promulgated his opinion, that nothing could be more agreeable and
engaging than the very lady, who to them had appeared in so opposite a
character.

No notice was taken of this _dictum_, for Philip had such a muttering
way of delivering his wise sayings, as made them seem like speeches
addressed to nobody in company, and of course entitled to no answer from
any body. Philip however, who had laid down his proposition in general
terms, proceeded now to branch into particulars, and these produced the
following brief dialogue between son and father; the former carrying it
on in the character of proponent, the latter as respondent.

Mrs. Owen is very delicately made. I like slender limbs.

They suit well with slender likings.

She has a great deal of wit, and I am sure you thought so, for you
talked a great deal to her.

And to very little purpose it should seem.

She did not like Sir Owen to correct her child.

Then she should have taken the trouble out of his hands, for the boy
deserved correction, and I am afraid will shortly become incorrigible.

Here the alternation paused, and Cecilia, turning to her father,
said--What is it in the countenance of that boy, which, when I look upon
him, causes me to shudder?

It is, said the father, because you read his character in his features,
and are persuaded, that the child, who sets out by tormenting a poor
helpless dog, will in time grow up to be the tormentor of a poor
helpless man. I own there is something in the boy repulsive to my
nature.

He has fine eyes, said Philip.

They are indications of his mind, and give fair warning, replied De
Lancaster; so far they may merit what you say of them.

I hope, rejoined Cecilia, my dear little nephew in no future time will
form acquaintance or connection with him. He never will be cruel I am
sure; his little hands already are held out to every living thing he
sees, and his sweet smile bespeaks humanity.

Yes, and as surely as he lives, my dear, replied De Lancaster, his hands
will be held out to all his fellow creatures in distress, or I am a
false prophet. As for my friend Sir Owen, I pity him from my heart, poor
man. His last words made a strong impression on me. If he submits to
keep these plagues about him, I fear he will never know another happy
day.

Philip’s opinion of Mrs. Owen was not altered, but his fund of
conversation was exhausted, so he said no more, and the coach discharged
its freight in the port, from which it had set out.

As we hold it matter of conscience not to keep our readers any longer in
the nursery, we must here avail ourselves of our privilege, and pass
very slightly over a period of our hero’s life, which does not furnish
us with matter sufficiently interesting to be recorded in these memoirs.
As we profess to give the history of the human mind, we trust it will be
allowed us to present our John De Lancaster to the reader as a boy,
whose thoughts and actions were no longer merely neutral, but such as
might naturally lead to the developement of that character, which he was
destined to exhibit in his more advanced maturity. For the present we
shall content ourselves with observing that, although the age, when
education ought to have begun, was now gone by, still the question of
what species that education should be, whether public or private, was
not decided.

Within this period the following letters, under different dates from the
West Indies, had reached the hands of Mrs. Philip De Lancaster.

               “_From Captain Jones--Letter the first._

                     “Madam,

     “In a few days after I had arrived at my destination I fell ill,
     and my disorder soon assumed those appearances, which in this
     country are considered to afford but little chance of a recovery.
     The wife and daughter of my friend Major Parsons, who came
     passengers with me in the same transport, with a benignity, that
     exposed their lives to danger, under Providence saved me from
     death.

     “Unfortunately for the younger of my preservers, she conceived so
     strong an attachment, that I must have been the most unfeeling and
     the most ungrateful of all men could I have remained insensible to
     her partiality. Her health became in danger, and both her father
     and mother, well apprised of the cause of it, offered and even
     solicited me to accept her hand in marriage, and I did not
     withstand their joint appeal.

     “Thus, after your example, I have married, and I am persuaded, that
     my wife, had she the honour of being known to you, would please you
     by the gentleness of her character and the unaffected modesty of
     her manners. I have stationed her in a little cottage near
     adjoining to the barracks, and in a healthy situation; but her
     father Major Parsons is like myself a soldier of fortune, and our
     establishment is proportioned to our means.

     “I write by this conveyance to lay her jointly with myself at the
     feet of my benevolent patron your ever-honoured father. She
     presumes to send you a few tropical fruits of her own preserving,
     and hopes you will condescend to accept of them together with her
     most humble respects and unfeigned good wishes.

                    I have the honour to be,
                               Madam, &c. &c.
                                     JOHN JONES.”

The second letter from Captain Jones, of a date posterior by about a
year to the foregoing, is as follows--

              “Madam,

     “Alas, that I must trouble you with my sorrows! I have lost my
     wife; my poor Amelia is no more. She was a being of so mild a
     nature, that were I conscious of a single word, which ever passed
     my lips to give her pain, I never should have peace of mind again.
     The ravages of this exterminating fever are tremendous: she fell
     before it almost without a struggle. The affliction of her parents
     is extreme, and I am told the sternest soldier in my company, that
     followed her body to the grave, could not refrain from tears, for
     every soul that knew her, loved and lamented her. She has left an
     infant daughter, in whose tender features I trace a perfect
     miniature of her whom I have lost. As soon as ever her afflicted
     grandmother can be induced to part from her, I mean to rescue her
     from this infernal climate, and consign her to the motherly care
     and protection of my kind friend and relation Mrs. Jennings, who
     resides at Denbigh--

     “Oh Madam, you, who know the inmost feelings of my breaking heart,
     will you in pity look upon my child, the legacy of my Amelia, my
     all in this world, and perhaps before this letter reaches you, the
     only relict of your wretched friend?

                   I have the honour, &c. &c.
                                    JOHN JONES.”

This letter was soon followed by the melancholy tidings of poor Jones’s
death; his infant child Amelia had in the mean time arrived, and was
placed under the care of Mrs. Jennings above-mentioned, who by the
bounty of old Morgan, was liberally rewarded with a pension for her
education of the orphan.




CHAPTER V.

_Puerile Anecdotes of our Hero John De Lancaster._


Although Mr. De Lancaster in one of his prophetic moments had
pronounced, that the mother of our hero would conceive a more than
ordinary love and affection for her infant, the event did not exactly
verify the prediction: sorrow had benumbed her heart: she had so long
fed upon it in secrecy and silence, that all the little energy, which
nature had originally endowed her with, was lost. From her husband she
derived no comfort, and for the maternal duties she was totally unfit.
The accommodating contract she had entered into with Philip for all
nuptial emancipation in future, was so religiously observed on both
sides, that it did not seem in the order of things natural, that the
heir of the family would ever be saddled with a provision for younger
children.

Young John, who had occasioned much trouble and annoyance to his mother
by inadvertently coming into the world, before he was expected, seemed
likely to go out of it without experiencing the care of any other parent
than the benevolent Cecilia; for Mr. Philip De Lancaster, as I have
before hinted, had married without any other moving cause than what
operated upon him through the strainers of his father’s recommendation
and advice, and was not remarkably uxorious. On the contrary, as the
embers of affection were not vivid in his bosom, and as there is reason
to believe he did not take much pains to kindle them in the bosom of his
lady, it may be presumed, that he was as little studious to find
consolation for her sorrows, as she was to interrupt his indolence, or
to resent his indifference.--Amusements she had none, and occupations
extremely few: she discharged herself from all attention to family hours
and family meals; eat and slept by herself, received no company and paid
no visits, alive to little else but the reports, which at stated times
she expected and received from Mrs. Jennings at Denbigh of little
Amelia’s health and improvement, whom at the same time she had not
energy enough to visit, whilst her father was a prisoner at Glen-Morgan
under the coercion of two inexorable keepers, old age and gout. She had
a servant Betty Wood, an ancient maiden and as melancholy as herself,
who now and then read homilies to her, and now and then worked carpeting
and quilted counterpanes, over which she regaled herself with hymns,
sung in a most sleep-inviting key to adagio movements, that scarce moved
at all. This work of hers, like that of the chaste Penelope, was without
end or object; for it rarely failed to happen that, before the task was
finished, Mrs. De Lancaster had changed her fancy as to the pattern, and
destroyed perhaps in a few minutes what patient Betty had been employed
upon for months: her carpets never covered the floor, nor did her
counterpanes ever ornament the beds.

As Mr. Philip De Lancaster had no further punctilios to observe towards
his lady, he seemed to think that nothing more could be required of him
towards his son except to measure his growth from year to year by
notches in the wainscot of the steward’s parlour, which are there
remaining to this hour as records of the extraordinary vegetative
powers, with which dame Nature had endowed the object of these memoirs.
Cecilia would fain have had her little nephew brought into the room
after dinner, but it was not often she was indulged in that wish, as the
old gentleman did not approve of the custom; and once, when the good
aunt was rather more importunate than was usual with her, he told her,
that the practice of introducing noisy children and prattling nurses
into the guest-room was so justly reprobated by all civilized societies,
that the citizens of Abydos became notorious to a proverb for their ill
manners in that particular, and were the laughing-stock of the more
refined Athenians--And should not you and I, said he, like the aforesaid
citizens, deserve to be the ridicule of our neighbours, if, instead of
entertaining them with the conversation of the table, we should treat
them with the din and gabble of a nursery?--From these, or any other
authorities, when abetted by her father, it was not Cecilia’s practice
to appeal, though perhaps she longed to observe to him, that his
neighbours were not in all respects exactly like the _refined
Athenians_.

De Lancaster nevertheless was extremely fond of his grandson, and once
in every forenoon had him brought into his library, where he would hear
him say the little lessons, that his aunt had taught him, and sometimes
with great good humour tell him stories, and repeat fables, which had
always some point of instruction couched under the moral of them, upon
which however the narrator was in the habit of descanting rather longer
than would have answered his purpose, had that been only to amuse the
hearer; but as this history does not undertake to record every incident,
that occurred during the boyish years of our hero, we shall content
ourselves with observing, that, as he advanced in strength and stature,
he gave proofs of a very early aptitude towards all athletic exercises
within the compass of his powers. He scrambled up the crags, forded the
gullies and braved the inclemencies of climate, with any boy of his age,
however bold or hardy.

That the only son and heir of a family so ancient, rich and respectable
should be indulged in these adventures, would not seem very natural,
but that his aunt could not, and his father would not, follow him in
these excursions, whilst every body else about the castle conspired to
encourage him in them, and applauded him for his resolution.

His great ambition was to rival young David Williams, son of the blind
minstrel, in the manly art of horsemanship. This hardy lad performed his
errands to the post office and market of the neighbouring town on a
poney, who yielded to none of Welch extraction in obstinacy and
determined disobedience to controul. He had more ingenious devices to
dislodge young David from his back, than young David had resources at
all times ready to disappoint and thwart him in his contrivances; and
hence it rarely came to pass, that the horse and his rider did not part
company before the expedition was complete and at an end. If David was
by chance encharged with frangible commodities, nobody could ensure upon
a worse bottom. Poney had not a single friend in house or stable; every
soul gave him an ill name; but some enjoyed to witness his malicious
tricks, whilst to others David always set out with an assurance, that he
would master him, and generally came home with tokens, that gave ocular
demonstration to the contrary.

One evening as David was returning home through the park with a cargo of
sundries in a basket, and just then in high good humour with his poney,
he was met by his friend John exactly at the pass, where the two roads
branched off, the one towards the castle, and the other to the stables.
David’s business carried him to the house, but the poney was disposed
to carry him and his business to the stable. This begat a difference of
opinions on the spot, and the dispute soon begat blows, which were
manfully laid on by the rider, and passionately resented by the
receiver. After a sufficient number of indecisive plunges, which brought
the basket of miscellaneous articles to the ground, but left the rider
only a little forwarder on his saddle than was quite convenient, poney
seemed in the humour to compromise the question between the two roads by
taking neither; but bolted forwards at full speed towards the hah-hah,
that bounded the pleasure ground, upon the very brink of which he made a
sudden stop, and throwing up his heels at the same instant with his head
between his knees, he completely effected his purpose by pitching his
jockey into the aforesaid hah-hah, which, luckily for its visitor, was
just then full of water.

When John, who had been spectator of the contest, had assisted his
friend in getting out of the water, and found all bones whole, he
repaired to the stable, where the contumacious poney was still standing
at the door, and, arming himself, with David’s whip, proceeded to mount.
This was a new demand, which the poney could by no means reconcile to
his feelings; the battle instantly commenced; and victory hung between
them for a while without any seeming partiality to either side: many a
time they came to the ground together, but never parted; till at length,
after plenty of restive manœuvres, and a pretty many Welch
remonstrances, poney gave in, and, to the immortal honour of our young
Antæus, ever after became as tractable as a turn-spit.




CHAPTER VI.

_Education stands still. The Seeds of Enmity are sown. The Incident of
the dying Soldier._


Whilst our hero was thus gaining laurels in the field by his bodily
achievements, in mental attainments he made no great progress. His good
aunt Cecilia laboured hard at her English lessons, but his play-fellows
and companions without any labour kept him in such practice with their
Welch, that between both languages he was in danger of speaking neither.
Still his kind instructress persevered in teaching him such things as
she could teach and he could learn, but although he was now advanced
beyond the age, when boys in general turn out to public schools, the
parties, which sate in council on the specific mode of education to be
pursued, were so wide of an adjustment, that it might well be made a
doubt if he was in any way of being educated at all.

Mr. Philip De Lancaster had naturally so little interest in his own
opinions upon this, or any other question, that he parted from them upon
the easiest terms, and took them back again upon the slightest reasons.
He had been heard to say that something should be thought of for him,
but the task of thinking was a task he did not concern himself about. If
the decision between public and private education had rested upon
Philip, his casting vote would have been as mere a matter of chance, as
the cast of the dice.

Mrs. De Lancaster, the mother, who never opened upon this subject,
except once to Cecilia, expressed her opinion that the question was of
no importance: he was his father’s son, and educate him how they would,
he would still be his son, and education could not mend him.

Cecilia was humbly of opinion, that the subject was above her, and
properly belonged to the other sex to consider and decide. She observed
however that Colonel Wilson had given his sons a public education, and
she believed he had no cause to repent of it: this was evidently a lure
to hook him into the debate, and a pretty clear insinuation which way
her judgment and her wishes pointed. But the master-opinion, which alone
could resolve, and carry resolution into effect, was still to be sought
for in the bosom of the grandfather, and he did not seem in haste to
bring it forth.

If it were put to me in the way of question, he said to Cecilia, whether
I am prepared to recommend a public school, I answer, no: if you should
persist to ask what other system I would recommend, I should observe to
you, that system is subordinate to nature, and that none such ought to
be laid down, till it is apparent and made clear to what the genius of
my grandson points. When I make use of the term genius, let me not be
understood as if admitting any inborn influence, which might seem to
favour the absurd chimeras about innate ideas. I am aware that Sophocles
in his Ajax asserts, that the happiness of man consists only in his
ignorance: in his ignorance of such things, as would make man miserable
did he know them, his happiness may indeed be said to consist; and so
far only I can agree with Sophocles; for ignorance, in its proper sense,
can make no man happy; on the contrary I hold it as a truth
incontrovertible, that, if any human being could be perfect in virtue,
he would be perfect in wisdom also; and if such be the test of wisdom,
how can ignorance be said to make him happy? Now if the wisdom of virtue
is to be instilled into the young pupil by the wisdom of books, it must
surely be by other books, than his masters in the dead languages may
always happen to select for his instruction in those languages. Cicero
wrote about the cardinal virtues, as he was pleased to call them, and it
is not quite clear to me, that suicide was not one of the family: in
fact, his book is good for nothing; the man was a follower of the New
Academy, and of course could have no opinion: his ambition was to talk
about every thing, and his maxim to decide upon nothing. You, my
excellent Cecilia, can for the present teach your nephew what he ought
to know, and perhaps if he never learns what you cannot teach, he will
have no loss. You will instil into his heart religion in its purest
principles--in teaching that, you teach him every thing.

When this honest, but eccentric, man had thus unluckily entrenched
himself on the wrong side of a clear question, he could find so many
specious arguments of this sort for doing nothing, that of course
nothing was done; and the mind of the neglected boy, now thirsting for
instruction, found every avenue shut against him, except that only,
which had little new to afford.

It so happened that Colonel Wilson had been called away upon an exchange
of his government for one of rather more emolument in a distant
situation, where he had been obliged to reside for a certain term upon
his first taking possession. This was a heavy loss to young John, who
had the mortification to hear the wit and understanding of David Owen
cried up and applauded, whilst he himself was let to remain in a state
little short of dereliction. Once or twice he was admitted to the honour
of standing by his father, whilst he angled in the canal; but John saw
no amusement in watching a float, that never once gave the signal of a
bite. In Cecilia’s flower garden he took some small delight, but it was
pleasure of too tame a sort to satisfy his ardent mind.

One morning when Sir Owen’s fox hounds were to throw off in Kray wood,
he was permitted to put himself under the convoy of the groom, and go
out to see them find; but alas, he was destined to exhibit himself on
the back of the reformed poney, late the letter-carrier and drudge of
the castle; when the first object, that struck his sight, was the fine
young heir of Penruth Abbey, mounted on a full-sized hunter, and dressed
in a uniform of green and scarlet. He was accompanied by several
gentlemen in the same uniform, and, Sir Owen not being in the field,
seemed to act as master of the hunt. When the hounds began to challenge
in the cover, the sportsmen were in motion, and poor John, conscious of
his unworthiness to enrol himself amongst them, struck down a narrow
lane, that skirted the wood and led towards the castle by the shortest
cut. The country had been drenched with rain, and whilst John and poney
were bustling through this muddy pass, young Owen gallopped swiftly by,
and having spitefully contrived to sluice him, (man and horse,) all over
with the dirty soil, looked back and laughed.--Never mind, master
Johnny, cried the groom: sportsman’s fare--Not aware that the injury,
which the poor little fellow had received, was not confined to his
clothes, for upon drawing up and dismounting, which agony compelled John
to do without delay, not only his face was cut with the flinty rubbish,
that had been thrown up by the heels of Owen’s horse, but his eyes had
suffered much more seriously, so that he was obliged to be led home with
his handkerchief bound over his eyes, suffering the whilst intolerable
pain. What passed on his arrival at the castle need not be described: it
was some weeks before the skill of Mr. Llewellyn, and the tender care of
Cecilia, could be fairly said to have perfected the cure. No
intercourse in the mean time passed between the abbey and the castle,
and, if it was known at the former place (which there is good reason to
think it was) neither enquiry nor apology ever reached the latter.

Whilst the groom enraged the lower regions of Kray Castle with his
account of the malicious feat, John was quite as capable of
distinguishing between design and accident, and with fewer words, but
deeper meditation, laid up the insult in his mind, never to be
forgotten.

During the time that the boy, in consequence of this injury, was
interdicted from resorting to his book, impatient to be learning
something, he turned his thoughts towards blind Williams, who repeated
verses and played to him on the harp; which to enjoy, he would sit for
hours, with the shade over his bloodshot eyes, sympathizing with old
David on the lamentable loss of sight, and enquiring if it was attended
by that misery, which his imagination attached to it.

It chanced one day, whilst sitting in this attitude by the side of the
minstrel, he was solicited for his charity by a worn-out soldier, who
had fallen sick upon his way, and had been admitted into the house by
the servants for the purpose of relieving him in his distress. John
lifted up the shade from off his eyes, to look at him, and the
melancholy spectacle, which, through the misty medium of his feeble
optics, he imperfectly discerned, struck so hard upon his feeling heart,
that he suffered the very keenest pang, that pity could inflict. Food,
clothes, medicine, bed, every thing, that could relieve a suffering
fellow creature at the point to die, was immediately to be prepared. The
soldier’s tale was short; for in the history of his sufferings there was
a mournful uniformity: wounds and hard service in unhealthy climates had
made him old in the mid-stage of life; poverty and privation had
depressed his hardy vigour, and sickness, consequencial of those evils,
had at length broken down a gallant spirit, which, under these
accumulated visitations, could no longer struggle with its destiny.

John heard this sad recital of his woe with sympathizing tears; but when
he came to relate how cruelly he had been threatened and dismissed by
the young lord of a fine great house in the neighbourhood, (describing
Penruth Abbey) whilst begging charity at the door, where he saw the very
dogs fed with bread, for want of which he was starving, our
heart-struck hero started from his seat, and, stamping vehemently on the
floor, exclaimed--Let me but live to bring that Jew-born wretch to
shame, and let me die the death, I care not; tis enough!--Then turning
to the servants, he said--Take notice; my grandfather, your master, has
charity in his heart, and will not suffer this poor man to perish
through the want of any thing, that he can give. Let him therefore want
for nothing; when you have given him what he ought to have, take him to
a well-aired bed in a comfortable room, and send for Mr. Llewellyn to
attend upon him. I’ll answer for my orders--The soldier overpowered with
gratitude, only murmured out his thanks: blind David sung out
loudly--Heaven reward thee, my sweet child! Thou art a true De
Lancaster!




CHAPTER VII.

_The Soldier takes leave of our young Hero. Delivers to him a Pacquet he
was entrusted with, and dies._


Next morning, when the sun had risen, and old Robert De Lancaster was
attended upon, as usual, by David Williams, he enquired after the sick
soldier, which he understood had been taken into the house by the order
of his grand-son John. This drew from Williams a recital, much more
circumstantial, than had yet been made to him of that event. He gave the
very words, that John had uttered in resentment of young Owen’s
inhumanity, and they were deeply felt. De Lancaster remained silent for
a time, and gave no signal to the blind musician; at length he
said--Williams, my mind is agitated: give me something soothing, and
let it be a simple melody--I have hastily put together a kind of
ballad-melody of that very sort, replied the minstrel, which occurred to
me whilst reflecting upon young Mr. Owen’s want of charity to the poor
soldier, and, if it is your pleasure, I will recite it to the harp--Let
me hear it, said the master, and the minstrel sung as follows--

    “I’m sick, said the soldier, and cover’d with scars,
    “Behold the sad fruit I have reap’d in your wars!
    “Have pity, good master, I’m feeble and old,
    “I’m weary, and starving with hunger and cold.

    “Begone from my door, and appeal to the laws,
    “I am not of your country, nor friend to your cause:--
    “Thus answer’d the merciless squire in his pride,
    “And thus with disdain a young angel replied--

    “What ails thee, what ails thee, thou miserly elf,
    “To be hoarding and hugging thy rascally pelf?
    “See where old father care strews his thorns in thy bed,
    “And terrible death waves his dart o’er thy head.

    “Let thy cash buy the blessing and pray’r of the poor,
    “And let them intercede when death comes to thy door;
    “They perhaps may appease that importunate pow’r,
    “When thy coffers can’t buy the reprieve of an hour.

    “Foolish man, don’t you know ev’ry grain of your gold
    “May give food to the hungry and warmth to the cold?
    “A purchase in this world shall soon pass away,
    “But a treasure in Heaven will never decay.

    “Now tell me what pleasure you reap from your hoard,
    “And I’ll tell you what rapture your dross might afford;
    “Amid numberless joys I will name only these--
    “Gay days, happy nights and a conscience at ease.

    “Do you think, sordid wretch, when you turn a deaf ear
    “To the suit of the orphan that God does not hear?
    “Do you hope to escape from the searcher of hearts,
    “When the tear of the widow no pity imparts?

    “When the ag’d and infirm vainly put up their pray’r
    “For that mite, which your mass without missing could spare,
    “The angel of vengeance your crime will enroll
    “Amongst those of the demons, who murder the soul.

    “Give a shilling to-day, and the joy you’ll derive,
    “To-morrow shall swell your small tribute to five;
    “Progressive delight ev’ry hour shall encrease,
    “And at length a few guineas shall purchace your peace.

    “If you spurn my advice, you’re a blockhead and dunce,
    “You cannot serve God and your Idol at once;
    “Who traffics with Mammon will find in the end,
    “He has made a bad bargain, and lost a good friend.”

De Lancaster had always a kind word upon his lips for his old blind
minstrel, and having told him that he had added another leaf to his
laurel, went down to his family assembled in the breakfast room with all
that charity in his heart, which the ditty had recommended.

When the story of the soldier had been heard by Mr. Philip De Lancaster,
he coolly observed, that it was a trick to extort money; he would not
take the soldier’s word for a farthing, and did not believe young Owen
capable of any thing cruel or uncharitable.

When it was related to Cecilia, she threw her arms about the neck of the
benevolent boy, pressed him to her bosom, and prayed Heaven to preserve
him from the malice of that spiteful imp, whose evil-boding visage
haunted her both day and night.

When the mother of John was informed of the circumstance, and
understood that the man, who laid sick in the house was a soldier, she
sent Betty Wood to enquire of him what regiment he belonged to, and when
answer was brought that he was invalided from the 15th foot in the West
Indies, and private in the company of the late Captain John Jones, whom
he should ever bewail as the kindest master and the best of friends, it
seemed as if the fountain of her tears was never to be exhausted. An
irresistible desire possessed her to see the man, and, after certain
preparatory manœuvres, conducted by faithful Betty, she actually carried
her resolution into effect, and entered the chamber of the soldier,
planting Betty at the door to prevent interruption. As he had been
selected from the ranks by Captain Jones, as his domestic servant, he
had many anecdotes to relate, highly interesting to the hearer, and
very honourable to his late master: he spoke also warmly in the praise
of his deceased lady, and in raptures of his dear little Amelia, with
whom it seems he had come over to England in the pacquet, and, after
many adventures and misfortunes, was on his way to visit her at Denbigh,
when sickness overtook and reduced him to the condition, in which the
charity of her angel son had found him.

He was now exhausted, and Mrs. De Lancaster forbore to press upon him
any more enquiries: she bade him be assured that he should never want;
she would pension him for life; she would settle him at Glen-Morgan in
the neighbourhood of Denbigh, and, if ever she became possessed of that
estate, he should be taken into her house, and pass the remainder of
his days in ease and competency.

Alas, good lady, feebly he replied, I have but few more days on this
side the grave, and them I must employ in asking mercy of my God, and
imploring blessings on your son, who has been to me as an angel before
death.

This said, she left him, and retired unseen to her chamber. John was
soon after heard, as usual, at her door, and admitted.

Come to my arms, she cried, my dear, my noble boy! Did you but know how
I feel and why I feel your charity to that poor soldier, you would not
wonder at the tears I shed, whilst thus I press you to a breaking heart.
But you will know me after I am dead, and that time is not far off.
Leave me, my child; I shall not often send for you; my sorrows must be
only to myself. Go, go, be happy! I am very ill. Send Wood; and leave
the room.

In the forenoon of the day next ensuing, young John De Lancaster visited
the poor soldier; he was dying, but found strength to say--God bless you
and farewell! Had I been relieved when I begged charity of that
neighbouring gentleman, who turned me from his door, I think I might
have lived, but I fainted soon after, and all your goodness could not
save me. He then reached out his hand, and delivered to John a small
leathern purse, which he prayed him to open. It contained a plain gold
ring, which Captain Jones had given him in charge for his daughter
Amelia, being the wedding ring of her mother: could he have reached
Denbigh, he had delivered it to her: he had been strongly beset by
hunger more than once, but he had resisted every impulse to part from
it, and had fulfilled his trust at the expence of his life: he now
committed the deposit to the care of one, who he was sure would
faithfully convey the legacy to its proper owner, and he devoutly prayed
to heaven, that it might prove a blessing to the wearer--John took the
ring, and assured him it should never pass from any other hands but his
into those of Amelia Jones.

In the evening of that day the soldier died.

       *       *       *       *       *

Have patience with me, kind and courteous reader! I am not leading you
into the regions of romance: I aim not to surprise you; but I am aiming
to find out, (if haply nature shall direct my hand) that clue, which,
rightly followed, may empower me to unravel the recesses of your heart.
This is my object; in attempting this, success, however short of
triumph, will repay me; but, if I wholly fail, my labour’s lost; I have
no second hope.


                        END OF THE SECOND BOOK.




                            BOOK THE THIRD.




CHAPTER I.

_Early Efforts of our Hero’s Genius._


John’s attachment to the harp of David Williams inspired him with a
desire for being taught a few easy tunes by so great a master. In this
ambition he was warmly encouraged by his grandfather, who considered it
as the unequivocal characteristic of a true De Lancaster, and boldly
predicted that he would rapidly advance to hereditary celebrity on that
ancient and noble instrument.

Upon this occasion we should have been sorry if De Lancaster had failed
to recollect, that both Hercules and Alexander condescended to take
lessons on the harp, tho’ the former broke his masters head with his
own instrument, and the latter insisted upon his privilege of striking
the wrong string, whenever it suited him better than the right. Robert
therefore found it necessary to caution his grandson against copying
those boisterous scholars, and strictly enjoined him to give close
attention to the instructions of his master, after the example of the
Cretan youths, who were universally educated in music, and remarkably
obedient to their teachers.

John accordingly sate down with eagerness for the undertaking, and in
point of diligence few Cretans could have exceeded him; but when
unexpected difficulties began to stare him in the face, and every lesson
seemed to increase those difficulties, his ardour cooled and despair
possessed him wholly. David Williams at length pronounced _ex
cathedrâ_, that his pupil had positively no genius for the instrument;
the case was hopeless, and the harp was laid aside.

I am sorry for it, said the grandfather, but I am myself no performer on
the harp, though a lover of its melody, and sure I am that no man can
possess a spirit prepared to meet the vicissitudes of fortune with
equanimity and calmness, unless his passions have been disciplined by
music. Let the boy’s genius therefore be watched, and, if it points to
any other instrument, indulge him.

Shortly after the promulgation of this edict the musical propensities of
the discarded harper began to shew themselves in a very different
character, and he now conceived a passion for performing on the
trumpet.

Be it so! said the grandfather; it proves at least his spirit has a
martial cast.

Colonel Wilson was now returned, and heard with infinite delight the
story of the dead soldier, told by Cecilia so greatly to the credit of
his darling boy John; but when his friend De Lancaster told him with an
air of triumph of his reigning passion for the trumpet, he treated it as
a jest, and ridiculed the idea. Disappointed by this reception, and
somewhat piqued, De Lancaster was determined to stand to his defences,
and that Wilson, who had arraigned the trumpet, should be doomed to hear
the trumpet’s advocate.

Sir, said he, you will permit me to remind you, that the trumpet is an
ancient and a venerable instrument. If it be said that the walls of the
city of Thebes were raised by the lute of Amphion, we have better
authority for believing that the walls of Jericho were thrown down by
the trumpets of the Israelitish Priests.

I hope, replied Wilson, the trumpet of my friend John will not be quite
so efficacious. If the castle tumbles down with the blast, we may chance
to be buried in its ruins.

Wilson had better have left this skit alone, for his friend was at no
time guilty of giving his hearers too little information, and he was
just now put upon his mettle to discuss the merits of the insulted
trumpet under its three denominations according to the respective
characters, in which the ancients employed, and have described it. The
first of these, he told him, was the _tuba_, or straight trumpet,
properly so called: the second was the _lituus_, or shrill-toned
trumpet, curved at the extremity: the third and last the _cornuus_, or
deep-toned horn, of natural conformation, curved throughout: of these
the chief was the _tuba_ first named, which he informed him was unknown
to the Greeks, though not to Homer, who did not employ it in his
battles, knowing it was not then in use.

He was right in not doing so, said Wilson; but if he had done otherwise,
I, for one, should never have found him out.

Whether Wilson imagined that his friend had done with his trumpets it is
impossible to say, but it is very easy to believe that he was not aware
how many he had in petto, for he seemed astonished when given to
understand, that there were not less than six different sorts of the
tuba, as classed by Eustathius into that of the Athenians, invented by
Minerva; the Egyptian trumpet, contrived by Osiris, and employed in
their sacrifices; the trumpet of the Gauls, with a peculiar mouthpiece,
of a shrill tone, and by them called Carynx; the Paphlagonian trumpet,
mouthed like a bull and very deep-toned; that of the Medes, blown with a
reed, also of a deep tone, and lastly, the Tyrrhenian trumpet, extremely
acute and high-pitched in conformity to which it is supposed the Romans
modelled their’s.

Scarcely was this edifying dissertation finished, when the hall
resounded with a blast, loud enough, it should seem, to shake its aged
banners into tatters: Wilson hastened to the scene of action, and found
his friend John under the tuition not of any of the great masters
above-mentioned, but of a puppet-show man, who travelled the country,
and recommended himself by the strength, rather than by the sweetness,
of his tones. This gentleman, who had just recruited his lungs with an
emollient dose of sweet Welch ale, blew with might and main in return
for the hospitality he had received, and doubtless for the honour of the
corps he belonged to. The Goddess Fame never gave a louder crack for the
best favourite she had, though he were standing at her back, and, like
the bellows-blower of an organ, had pumped breath into her lungs to let
the people hear his own good deeds. The performer, who was an adept in
more arts than one, had just then played a somerset, to the great
delight of his pupil John, and was standing on his hands with his heels
erect in the air, when Mrs. Elizabeth Wood entering the hall, and seeing
a pair of human legs in an attitude so totally irreconcileable to her
idea of the proper place, which human legs ought to hold in society,
uttered, as in duty bound, a most violent scream, and in the same breath
announced an order for silencing that horrid trumpet; it had nearly
thrown her lady into fits. That ancient and venerable instrument, (so
called by Mr. De Lancaster) was accordingly for ever laid aside, and
Scaramouch was fain to make his retreat without sound of trumpet; but as
he could tumble, conjure and shew tricks, that would give no offence to
the nervous system of the lady above stairs, it is probable that both
the ladies and gentlemen below stairs suffered him to entertain them
before he left the castle; and as he very politely invited them to be
present at the opening of his theatre in the village, when Punch and
his company would present them with the entertaining interlude of the
Rape of the Sabines, with appropriate screamings by the ladies concerned
in the representation, it is presumed, that not a few of them were
prevailed upon to be present at that interesting exhibition.

The shock, that Mrs. De Lancaster had received, was by no means feigned.
She had now become a confirmed hypochondriac, and great alarm was
sounded forth by Mr. Llewellyn of an approaching decay, that he
endeavoured to stem by an unceasing course of medicines, which if they
had suited her case, were certainly not sparingly administered; but, as
she regularly grew worse and worse, it occasioned some to doubt whether
they had even the merit of being innocently neutral.

Thus ended the second abortive effort of our hero’s genius in the
musical department. Not totally discouraged, but cautious of annoying
his unhappy mother, he now betook himself to the humble Jew’s-harp,
whose sibilous strains by long practice and unwearied assiduity he so
contrived to modulate and diversify, as obtained for him the reputation,
amongst the servants at least, of executing some of the familiar Welch
airs in a style, that seemed the very echo of David Williams’s harp.

For this small accomplishment he was indebted to his genius only: There
were however other arts, in which he exercised himself under tuition. By
the favour of the gamekeeper he became an expert shooter at a mark, and,
since Colonel Wilson had returned, he put himself under the command of
his servant, a disabled veteran, who taught him to perform all the
motions of the manual and platoon so correctly, that the effects of this
discipline soon became conspicuous in the firmness of his step, and the
uprightness of his carriage.

When report was made to De Lancaster of his grandson’s wonderful
performances on the Jew’s-harp, he expressed more joy on the occasion
than the meanness of the instrument seemed to merit, and immediately
signified his pleasure, that the young minstrel should be summoned to
the dinner-room, where he was then sitting with Colonel Wilson, and at
the same time ordered the servant to bring the harp after him, for that
he would himself witness his performance.

When the servant had gone out to find the performer, the old gentleman
intimated to Wilson, that he hoped he would have his harp put in order
before he brought it with him, as he did not greatly relish the ceremony
of tuning--I confess, added he, I am curious to see the construction of
this Jewish harp; though I dare say it is the harp with crooked arms,
described by Hyginus, and played upon with the plectrum, which I am bold
to affirm was the practice of king David.

To all this Wilson maliciously made no other reply, but that he believed
the harp had crooked arms.--I was sure of it, said De Lancaster. Upon
the word, young John came in, and being asked where his harp was,
immediately applied it to his lips, and began to twang it in his very
best manner. In the name of wonder, exclaimed De Lancaster, what is the
boy about? Is he playing on the plectrum? No, cried he, I am going to
give you Shenkin.

He went on, and the grandfather heard him out, charmed into silence by
the novelty and ingenuity of the performance. When he had played the
air, which he did with great correctness of imitation, in the style of
David Williams, the old gentleman, turning to him with a smile,
said--Well, my good boy, you have done your part, and though your harp,
I confess, has disappointed me, your art has made up for it. This is the
first time I ever knew the harp was a wind instrument, and if the Jews
have the credit of inventing your machine, you have the credit of making
music out of it. Then, addressing himself to Colonel Wilson, he
observed, that the exact manner, in which he had imitated the style of
David Williams, brought to his recollection Ælian’s anecdote of the
famous Polygnotus of Thasos, whose magnificent paintings were so
correctly copied in miniature by Dionysius of Colophon, as to preserve
the whole spirit and excellence of the original in all its due
proportions, though upon the smallest scale. Having examined the Jew’s
harp, he observed, that this was one more instrument than he had ever
seen, or heard of before, and asked who taught him. Upon his replying
that he had taught himself, he turned to Wilson with an air of triumph,
and said--This proves what I have always maintained, that nature is the
best instructress.

In some things perhaps, said the Colonel. I presume, not in all.

I am not sure, said De Lancaster, that exception should be made of any.
John had a master for the harp: he made nothing of it: he takes up that
paltry scrap of iron, and makes admirable music. Such is the difference
betwixt the natural emanations of genius, and the laboured efforts, that
are extorted from the pupil by the lessons of a teacher.

John, who probably foresaw something coming forward, which he was not
interested to partake of, now stept up to his grandfather, and asked
leave to ride over to Glen-Morgan, and pass a day there.--Why to pass a
day?--Because he would go over to Denbigh, and execute a little
commission, which the poor soldier on his death-bed had requested him to
fulfil.--Of what nature was that commission?--Simply to deliver a little
token to the daughter of Captain Jones, which that officer had entrusted
to the care of his faithful servant the soldier, but which the poor
fellow did not live to execute.--What was the little token he was to
carry?--Pray, don’t ask me that, said the youth, and above all things
don’t let my mother know a word about the matter. It would be very much
to the honour of the poor soldier, if I told you all; but I hope you
won’t require me to do that.--On no account, replied De Lancaster, will
I make any such demand upon you. If you will take my coach, ’tis at your
service; if you had rather ride, let Ben the groom attend you, and give
your orders accordingly.

John took the hand of his grandfather, kissed it, nodded with a smile to
the colonel, and hastened out of the room.

You have a treasure in that noble boy, said Wilson; but I hope, my good
friend, he will not be suffered to go on any longer without education,
because he can play upon the Jew’s-harp without a master. Don’t be
offended with me, if I seem to step out of my office, when I speak to
one of your great knowledge in the learned languages, but I presume you
hardly can expect your grandson to understand Greek and Latin, unless he
has a teacher.

Perhaps not, replied De Lancaster; yet, if it were so to happen, it
would not be the first wonder of the sort, that hath come to pass. It is
well known what prodigies of learning have started up into notice, even
in their infant years, and possessed themselves of arts, sciences and
languages, without being ever put into the trammels of a teacher.

Indeed! cried the colonel.

Assuredly, replied the assertor, though it may not have fallen in your
way to be certified of the fact. I could, if necessary, adduce a host
of witnesses to attest the wonders, that have been effected by the human
genius, unassisted with instruction; but as your profession, Colonel
Wilson, has probably occupied too much of your attention to allow of
your turning your thoughts to enquiries of this cast, the things I might
relate of Lipsius, of Quirino, Alphonsus Tostatus and many others of
equal celebrity might appear to you incredible.

Very likely, interjected the colonel.

Yet are they, every one, supported by irrefragable authorities. The mind
of man, my friend, is in itself a miracle, and persons, who have been
predestined to extraordinary occasions, have been born under
extraordinary circumstances, as was the case with Luther, who, whilst he
was yet an infant at the breast, maintained a Latin thesis against the
Pope’s infallibility, which gave rise to the saying, that he sucked in
controversy with his mother’s milk.

My very good and learned friend, said Wilson, that you have somewhere
crossed upon this idle legend, amongst the boundless mass of books that
you have consulted I am well persuaded; but that you will commit your
excellent understanding by stating it in serious proof of the question
we are upon I am loth to suppose. When I believe your account of
Luther’s coming into the world with a square cap and gown, I will
believe his thesis at the breast, and, when I believe that, I will not
dispute the story of the prolific lady, who was delivered of three
hundred and sixty-five children at a birth.

I dare say you will not dispute it, rejoined De Lancaster, when you
hear the evidences for the truth of it. The prolific lady, you allude
to, was the Countess Herman of Henneberg, daughter of Count Floris, Earl
of Holland, Zealand and Friesland, and son of William of Holland, first
of that name; Floris was treacherously slain by the old Earl of Clermont
at a public triumph, and left behind him this daughter Margaret, who
married the aforesaid Count Herman of Henneberg. She, despising the
petition of a poor widow, who with twins at her breast asked charity,
gave her very reproachful words withal; whereupon the widow, failing on
her knees, appealed to Heaven in vindication of her innocency, and
earnestly prayed, that as she had conceived and brought forth those two
infants lawfully by her husband, even so, if ever that lady should be
pregnant, she might be visited with as many children at a birth as
there were days in the year. Not long after, the lady conceived, and
went into Holland to visit the earl her brother, taking up her abode in
the abbey of religious women at Leyden, where on the Friday before Palm
Sunday in the year 1276 she was delivered of three hundred and
sixty-five children, the one half being sons and the other daughters,
but the odd babe was double-sexed. They were all baptised by Guydon,
suffragan to the bishop of Utrecht, who named all the sons John, and the
daughters Elizabeth, but what name he gave to the odd child, said De
Lancaster with much gravity, I must own to you I do not find recorded.

John-Elizabeth for a certainty, said the Colonel. It may be so, resumed
the narrator; but I hazard no conjectures, I only detail facts. They
were however no sooner baptised than they all died, and the mother
likewise. Their two baptismal basins are still preserved, and have been
by me seen and examined in the said church at Leyden, together with the
inscription on the Countess’s tomb in Latin and in Dutch, the former
beginning thus--_Margareta, Comitis Hennebergiæ uxor, et Florentii
Hollandiæ et Zelandiæ filia, &c. &c._ Underneath is the following
distich, the first line of which has been some how or other curtailed of
its proper metrical proportion, as you will perceive--

   --_En tibi monstrosum et memorabile factum,_
    _Quale nec a mundi conditione datum._

Here Robert De Lancaster, having closed his narrative, turned a look
upon his friend, that seemed to appeal to him for his judgment on the
case. The colonel made no reply, and it may be presumed that the
appellant set down his silence to the score of his conviction.




CHAPTER II.

_Our Hero’s Visit to Amelia Jones._


John and old Ben, carrying his personals in a pair of saddle bags, were
on their way to Glen-Morgan the next morning before sun-rise. Ben was an
excellent guide across Welch moors and mountains, and did not confine
himself to the roads, that were in use, but had the art of steering to
his point with great œconomy of time and distance. It was a gleam of joy
to poor old Morgan to behold his grandson, for he was fond and John was
affectionate. Every body in the house ran to pay him their respects: the
green and red liveries were taken off their pegs, and dinner was served
up in state as to the heir-apparent. The parson, lawyer and apothecary
were in their places, the old butler in gala, and Mrs. Richards with her
attendant housemaids in high requisition.

After an early breakfast the next morning John set off for Denbigh, and
presented himself at the door of Mrs. Jennings, who received him with
all possible courtesy: when informed of the matter he was charged with,
and of his wish to see Amelia, she was summoned, and ready at the call,
ran down stairs, and was instantly in the room: upon seeing a stranger,
she stopped short, fixed her eyes upon him and made a curtsey: John
rose, bowed, and seized at once with admiration and surprize, (not
expecting to be encountered by an object of such striking beauty) seemed
to have lost all recollection of his errand, and stood as if he had no
other business but to gaze in silence. As the embarrassment was now
becoming reciprocal, Mrs. Jennings thought it was high time to remind
him of the commission he had imparted to her. Having lost the words,
with which he meant to preface the delivery of the little pacquet, he
produced it at once, and having delivered it to Amelia, endeavoured to
relate what it was, and how he came by it. His narrative was not very
distinctly given, and as soon as he perceived the effect it was likely
to produce, he stopped short, and looked to Mrs. Jennings for relief.
The lovely girl received it with a trembling hand, and whilst she
murmured out her thanks, opened the pacquet, snatched a momentary glance
upon the relique it contained, and would have sunk upon the floor, had
not John eagerly interposed, and throwing himself on one knee, supported
her in his arms, her head reclining on his shoulder.

When she had recovered, Amelia followed by Mrs. Jennings left the room,
and John remained in solitary meditation for a few minutes, till the
lady of the house returned and made the joint apologies of Amelia and
herself for having left him so abruptly. As soon as he was certified
that there was no further cause for alarm, he began to describe to Mrs.
Jennings how much he was enchanted and surprised by the uncommon beauty
of her lovely charge, who, when he had prepared himself to see a little
girl running into the room, had presented herself to him with all the
graces of a finished woman, elegant in her manners and charming in her
person.

Perhaps, said Mrs. Jennings, you were not aware that my poor orphan is
but two years younger than yourself. As to the beauty, which you are
pleased to notice, I rather think it is more a promise than an actual
possession; but of her more essential good qualities I can confidently
speak; for a better disposition, greater modesty of nature and
benevolence of heart I never yet contemplated in human creature. To
these virtues she was born; these at least, poor child, she inherits
from her parents, and I think that portrait fronting you, which you are
now looking at, conveys no slight impression of an amiable and noble
character; it is a striking likeness of her father, taken by an eminent
artist, who was a visitor at Glen-Morgan, when Captain Jones passed a
few days with your grandfather, before his embarking for the West
Indies, which I well remember he did on the very day that you were born
at Kray Castle.

And to the very day, on which I cease to live, exclaimed our hero,
raising his voice, and directing his eyes to the portrait, I swear I
will devote myself to the protection of his orphan daughter. Unhappy,
gallant man! I have his history from his faithful soldier. Would he
could hear me! I almost can believe he does; for mark, how tenderly his
eyes are turned upon me. Ah sweet Amelia, what I may be I know not, but
yours in every faithful service I shall be. Our first acquaintance has
commenced in sorrow; Heaven grant, it may grow up and ripen into joy.

This said, he turned his eyes from the picture, and behold they lighted
on Amelia, standing by his side. Surprised, confused, and doubting
whether he beheld a vision or reality, he threw his arms about her,
clasped her to his heart, and in his transport pressed his glowing lips
upon her blushing cheek. Then rushing to the door--Pardon me, he
cried--and vanished with love’s arrow in his heart.

Ah madam, ah my friend, exclaimed the trembling girl, succour me, save
me, or I am undone. If this young heir of two such rich and ancient
families does not at once resolve never to waste a thought on me, what
will become of me? What will his grandfather, whose bread I eat, what
will his mother say? The house of De Lancaster will rise against me,
and I must fly to labour for my living, or involve you in my ruin.

It is even so, my child, and you discern your danger rightly. He is a
noble, generous youth, but he never can be yours in any time to come,
and you must cautiously avoid him. As for what passed just now, you must
think no more of it. Young spirits, taken by surprise, will break out
unawares, and you must forgive him.

Forgive him! cried Amelia; yes, it is easy to forgive him, but when
shall I be able to forget him? Never.

Whilst this conversation was carrying on, a note was delivered to Mrs.
Jennings, in which she read as follows.--

             “Madam,

     “I cannot leave this place till you assure me that Miss Jones has
     recovered from the alarm, which my inconsiderate conduct was the
     cause of, and that I have not offended past forgiveness.

                 I have the honour to be, &c.
                           “John De Lancaster.”

To this Mrs. Jennings instantly returned the following answer--

           “Sir,

     You have given no offence to Amelia Jones, but as you know the
     delicacy, that is due to a destitute young orphan in her dependant
     situation, I am sure your sensibility will remind you how necessary
     it will be for her peace, and how consistent with your honour, to
     leave her in her obscurity, and suffer me to hope this interview
     will be the last.

                                                          “&c. &c.”




CHAPTER III.

_Business, long postponed, is at length concluded to the Satisfaction of
all Parties._


We have before observed, that opposition of opinions made no breach in
friendship between the worthy parties, who were in the habit of carrying
on the debates, that occurred at Kray Castle. In the first place it is
not certain that Robert De Lancaster was in all cases tenacious of his
argument merely from conviction of its strength, but partly perhaps from
attachment to it for its singularity, and the occasion it afforded him
oftentimes of displaying that fund of philological erudition, which he
indisputably possessed: in the second place, it is not to be denied,
that whenever he was absolutely convinced of the opinion he defended,
he was not apt to think the worse of it, because his friend Wilson could
not be brought to adopt it.

As his researches had chiefly carried him to those authorities, of which
the classical scholar takes no account, so by arming himself with them
in the lists of controversy, he fought with weapons, and made
left-handed thrusts, that even literary men could rarely parry, and
Colonel Wilson never. So equipped, he could lay down a proposition,
which nobody would dispute, and draw inferences from it which nobody
could admit: but let this be considered rather as an exercise of his
ingenuity, than as a defect in his understanding.

Colonel Wilson, who loved the man, and understood his character, saw
with infinite regret his indecision as to the education of his
grandson, whose strong natural understanding demanded cultivation, and
whose handsome person was now ripening into early manhood. Edward, the
younger son of Colonel Wilson had now left the university, having
obtained every honour, that either his classical or academical exercises
could procure for him. He had been ordained deacon, and was now of age
to take priest’s orders. He also contemplated our neglected hero with
compassionate regret, and had taken up a very favourable impression both
of his talents and disposition. He thought with his father on the side
of public education in general, but he did not consider himself upon
those terms with Mr. De Lancaster, which would warrant him to volunteer
any opinion upon the subject.

The opportunity, which he did not venture to seek, one day presented
itself, when De Lancaster, sitting after dinner, addressed himself to
the colonel, and said--I believe I am aware of most of the arguments,
that are usually adduced in favour of a public school, and am so far
from questioning the good sense of those parents, who make that system
of education their choice, that I could almost admit, that out of a
hundred cases it is the wisest course, which can be taken in ninety and
nine: the only question with me is, whether mine be not exactly that
single exception. If I wished to cherish in my grandson’s heart that
early spirit of emulation, which might urge him to the pursuits of fame
and fortune in either of the liberal professions, a public school would
be the proper nursery for his ambition; but that is not my wish. If he
can creditably support the independent station, which his ancestors have
held for many generations past, I aim at nothing more; and surely, when
I admit that public schools are the fittest nurseries for public
characters, I may be allowed to say that private education is properest
for those, who are destined to fill private stations. If John De
Lancaster survives to be the owner of Kray-Castle (which Heaven grant!)
I hope he will there establish his abode, and be found the protector of
merit, the friend of his tenants and the father of the poor. He might do
this without the help of any of the heathen writers, either Greeks or
Romans; but I don’t wish to exclude them; a gentleman should not be
unacquainted with them; though I am painfully and penitently convinced
he may bestow too large a portion of his time upon them. Plutarch in his
treatise, that Grotius has prefixed to his edition of Stobæus, debates
the question how young students are to read the poets, to what extent
and under what exceptions: It is a heavy and Bœotian work, that talks of
many things, and teaches nothing. In this country we manufacture our
children, male and female, and by the labour of the workman attempt to
give them all the same polish, let the materials they are composed of be
ever so inert and heavy. Nobody taught the nightingale to sing, yet
every foolish father and mother conceive they can teach their jackdaw to
carol like that heaven-born songstress. It is lost labour to manure and
dress a soil, in which there is no principle of vegetation. This I trust
is not the case with my grandson John: He is a manly, sensible,
honorable boy, and has given striking proof of a benevolent heart in his
conduct towards the poor soldier, who died in my house; this he did
without instruction from his Horace or his Juvenal, and this perhaps he
would not have had an opportunity of doing at a public school; at all
events I should not have had the opportunity of witnessing it. I
therefore give my preference to a private and domestic education. Now,
Mr. Edward Wilson, you, who are covered with laurels, worthily bestowed
upon you by your venerable Alma Mater, if you think I am in error,
convince me of my error, and you will not find me backward to retract my
opinion and adopt a better.

To give my opinion, replied Edward Wilson, in a question of such
magnitude would in all cases be presumptuous, but to obtrude it in
contradiction to your superior judgment would be unpardonable.
Circumstanced however as your grandson is in point of age and
understanding, I hold him so unfitted for a station at the very bottom
of a public school, that even without adverting to the very strong
motives, which you assign for education under your own eye, I answer
without hesitation, that my sentiments perfectly agree and coincide with
yours.

I am made very happy by your approbation, said De Lancaster, and now I
must tell you, Mr. Wilson, that an event has been announced to me by
this letter, which in one sense I must consider as a loss, in another as
a gain. My loss is that of an old acquaintance and contemporary, the
late Reverend Dr. Mathew Philips; my gain is the opportunity it affords
me of tendering to you the benefice, which he held by my gift--I
perceive you are about to thank me, but I must request that neither you
nor your father will oppress me on this occasion--for in making you this
offer I do it from my firm persuasion of your fitness, and not merely
through my friendship for your worthy father, which, great and sincere
although it be, would never bias me against my conscience to commit the
charge of souls into the hands of any man, of whose sufficiency I had
cause to doubt. Spare yourselves therefore and me the needless ceremony
of bestowing thanks, where in reality they are not due; for what would
you say, if it should turn out, that I have an object in my view, which
would at once convince you, that in serving you I have not overlooked
myself?

Name the object, I beseech you, Sir, said Edward; and if you hold me
capable of the undertaking, command me!

I perceive you have anticipated my suit, resumed De Lancaster. John, my
grandson, is as yet the only stay and support of an antient and not
ignoble family. Your father has remonstrated with me on the subject of
his neglected education. His motives were friendly, and he made them
known: mine for my seeming negligence had reference to the event, which
I knew to be impending, and has now come to pass, though I could not in
delicacy impart it to him. It was the wish of my heart, dear Edward, to
commit the education of my boy to you; but I confess, such is my nature,
and so am I constituted, that, until I had it in my power to confer a
small favour upon you, I could not ask you to bestow a very great one
upon me.

I am deeply sensible, said Edward, of the honour I derive from your good
opinion, but I am also aware of the importance and difficulty of the
undertaking. That I can teach your grandson Greek and Latin, if he is
disposed to learn, there is little doubt; but when I consider that
amongst my many duties this perhaps will be the lightest, I must look to
you for advice as to the system of education, which you would recommend
me to pursue as we advance in what may be called the beaten track of
school-learning. I confess to you I see no danger in those studies to
the man of deep erudition, but much to the superficial and shallow
scholar, for the morality of the heathen writers is not in all respects
the morality of the gospel, and the philosophy of the Greeks is in no
respect the religion of a christian.

Your observation, said De Lancaster, is perfectly just; but as this is a
subject that will require some fore-thought, I will turn it in my mind,
and give you my opinion upon the first opportunity, that shall occur.
Mr. Philip de Lancaster is now from home, and I think he should by all
means be present at our discussion, that if he does not interest himself
in what so materially concerns his son, he may at least be convinced
that we do.

The topic being thus adjourned, their conversation turned to other
subjects, not important to record.




CHAPTER IV.

_Our young Hero accidentally meets Sir Arthur Floyd, and Mr. Philip De
Lancaster visits a certain Lady at Penruth Abbey._


In the morning of the third day young John De Lancaster left
Glen-Morgan, and set out on his return to Kray Castle. As he was passing
through part of the grounds belonging to Sir Arthur Floyd, whose house
was within sight from his road, he chanced to meet that gentleman, as he
was taking his ride about his demesne. Sir Arthur accosted him with much
civility, and adverting to the accident, that had befallen him in the
field, when he was out with Sir Owen’s hounds, expressed his concern for
the unpleasant consequences that had ensued, and hoped it would not
discourage him from coming out again.

I shall not easily be tempted to come out when Mr. David Owen is in the
field.

I hope, returned the baronet, you do not consider it as a purposed
injury on the part of that young gentleman.

I don’t suppose the gentleman could exactly instruct the horse he rode
to throw dirt in my face, and almost put my eyes out; but I am not
obliged to the gentleman for looking back and laughing at me, when he
discovered the condition I was in.

I trust, resumed Sir Arthur, he did not know the extent of the mischief
he had done, and when he did know it, I hope he made those enquiries,
which it behoved him to make in such a case.

I don’t suppose, said John, Mr. Owen thought that necessary. He had
enjoyed his joke, and was not curious to enquire how I had relished
it--but I have simply answered your questions, Sir Arthur; when I have
serious cause to resent Mr. Owen’s treatment of me, I shall look to him
only for redress.

I hope, young gentleman, said Sir Arthur gravely, you will not consider
me as a busy body in this affair between you, for though my habits of
intimacy are chiefly with the house of Owen, I have all possible respect
for your worthy grandfather, and every one, that bears his name. If I
seem to intrude upon you therefore with any further questions, believe
me it is only in the hope of setting matters straight, which at present
appear to be rather out of course, and accordingly I beg leave to ask
you as to the truth of a report, that circulates about the neighbourhood
respecting a poor distressed soldier, who received charity from you at
your house, and is said to have been very harshly treated at the abbey
door, when supplicating for relief, by young Owen in person.

Such I believe to be the fact, was the answer.

It tells much to the dishonour of the party in question, that being the
fact; but if the soldier be still within reach, I hope you will allow me
to tender you these few guineas for his use on the part of my young
friend David Owen, as an atonement for his oversight.

A piece of bread and a draught of beer might have been of use, but the
money is of none. The man is dead.

My God!--cried Sir Arthur; turned a look of marked regard upon our hero,
bowed and rode off.

Mr. Philip De Lancaster had of late stepped a little out of his
non-elastic character, and been rambling from the castle every forenoon
between the hours of breakfast and dinner. Nobody was curious to trace
him in these excursions, but it could not fail to be discovered, that
his visits were to the Spanish lady at the abbey house of Penruth. To
say that Philip was in love with Mrs. Owen might be to mistake a habit
for a passion; he was in the habit of turning his poney’s head
abbey-ward, as soon as he had sallied from the castle-gate, and poney
was in the habit of going on without any turn at all till he stopped at
the aforesaid abbey door. When Philip dismounted, Mrs. Owen’s lacquey
was also in the habit of ushering him to his lady’s sitting-room, where
he silently took his chair and his chance for being spoken to, when the
lady was in the humour and at leisure to speak to him.

The first remark, that had ever dropped from Mr. De Lancaster with
respect to Philip’s absence, occurred in his discourse with the Wilsons
about John’s education, and it so happened that Mrs. Owen in her tete à
tete that very morning had been rather more disposed to extort a
conversation than was usual with her, when the following very
interesting dialogue ensued.

I conclude, said the lady, that this extraordinary melancholy, which
seems to hang eternally upon you, my good friend, can only be accounted
for by your concern for Mrs. De Lancaster’s dismal state of health and
spirits.

Not at all, said Philip: that’s not it.

What is it then? What in the name of wonder can it be?

I can’t tell. It comes of its own accord.

I don’t know how to believe you. There must be some cause: as sure as
can be you have caught the hip of your hypochondriac wife.

I have nothing to do with any hip of hers. I never go near her: that’s
agreed between us.

A happy release, if what I hear be true. Then you have no domestic
troubles.

None at all: quite free.

Why then so gloomy? What annoys you, what possesses you so wholly, that
you seem almost to have lost the very use of speech? Are you in love, my
friend?

Not with my wife.

With any body else?

With any body rather than with her.

With me, for instance--

Oh, with you sooner than with any body. I visit nobody but you.

True, but I thought you visited me from habit, not from liking.

I like you very much.

What shall I do to encrease your liking?

Nothing. It encreases quite fast enough without your help.

Bless me! That’s lucky; for to say the truth I have not been aware of
it. But I am so surprised, and so flattered by it, that I would fain
take some pains to cultivate so agreeable an impression.

You need not. There’s no occasion to trouble yourself about it.

Should not I contrive to make myself a little younger?

I don’t wish it.

A good deal handsomer?

It is not possible.

A great deal fairer?

That would entirely spoil the beauty of your complexion.

Well! that is charming. I protest you make me the politest speeches; but
alas! they go for nothing. No woman of discretion should encourage the
attachment of a man that’s married.

I may not always be a married man.

That’s true; but then perhaps you’d change your tone.

Never.

Were I quite sure of that, I would not listen to Sir Arthur Floyd; nor
indeed to any body in Sir Owen’s life time--but recollect we have each a
son. What must we do with them? They’ll never set their horses up
together. What is the reason that they don’t agree? I doubt your
youngster is a little proud. Isn’t it so?

I know nothing of him.

My David does not like him, I assure you. He says he is certain you are
not his father.

I know nothing of that also.

He never speaks of him by the name of John De Lancaster; he calls him
Jack Jones after the name of your wife’s favourite lover Captain Jones,
for whom she is so inconsolable.

Why now that’s wonderful--I can’t think how that secret could get out.

Secret, my friend! You are much mistaken if you think it is any secret.
They say he is as like that Jones as ever son was like a father--but I
am talking treason, and you must not betray me--People you know will be
censorious, and it is rather remarkable, that since Jones’s death she
has never added to your family stock.

There’s nothing remarkable in that, if the talking people knew what they
talked about.

Why certainly, were the case as they give out, one son of that sort is
quite enough, and were I in your place I should be apt to think him one
more than was welcome.

I am at no trouble about him. His grandfather and his aunt are at all
the pains of spoiling him.

Not by overmuch education I should think. Begging the young gentleman’s
pardon, I take him to be a most egregious dunce.

Oh! if you take him to be that, I shall take him to be my own son. But
with your leave we’ll say no more about him.

Agreed! Besides I know your time is nearly out. This however I must tell
you in secret--Sir Owen’s life is despaired of, and his whole estate is
settled and entailed upon my son: David will soon be of age, and
probably I shall then have some other residence to seek. Your father I
understand is in his seventy-fifth year, and your son in his fifteenth.
A short time according to the course of nature may set us both free. In
the mean time let me see you as frequently as you can contrive, and if I
have been fortunate enough to make an impression on your heart, be
assured you have interested mine no less; and so long as you continue to
persuade me that I am agreeable in your eyes, neither Sir Arthur Floyd,
nor any man, shall be other than indifferent to me.

Having said this, she reached out her hand, the gallant Philip pressed
it to his lips, made his reverence, and departed.




CHAPTER V.

_Mr. De Lancaster descants upon the Duties of a Preceptor in the learned
Languages._


It is probably in the reader’s recollection, that De Lancaster in his
last conversation with the Reverend Edward Wilson, had promised to
collect his thoughts, and offer his opinion on the duties of a preceptor
in the learned languages. There was little danger of his forgetting that
promise, nor any likelihood of his being unprepared to execute it, for
his mind was fully stored with all the several systems of the Greek
philosophers.

After breakfast the next morning he desired Philip to accompany him and
the Wilsons, father and son, into his library. This was not exactly the
thing, that Philip had meditated to do, but it was what he could not
escape from. He was not however hooked without a small struggle to get
free, for as soon as he understood it was to be a cabinet council on the
topic of his son’s education, he humbly moved for exemption on the plea
of his entire acquiescence in his father’s will and pleasure, modestly
declaring that he did not hold himself entitled to form any opinion in
the case--besides, he should be glad to take a little air, for his
health’s sake.

I hope, son Philip, said the old gentleman gravely, neither your health,
nor happiness, and give me leave to add--nor your honour can suffer, if
you bestow one hour upon your duty to your son, even at the expence of
your accustomed devoirs to the lady at the abbey.

This was answer quite enough for Philip, who walked doggedly into the
lecture room, and took his seat in a corner of it, as far out of the
reach of instruction or notice, as he could devise. Edward Wilson took
the left hand seat by De Lancaster’s arm-chair, and the colonel seated
himself on the other side of the fire place, in front of the old
gentleman; Philip, as I before observed, falling into the back-ground,
and behind his father.

After two or three preparatory hums, like the tap of the first fiddle,
as a signal for attention, De Lancaster commenced his harangue, as
follows--Mr. Edward Wilson, I address myself to you in particular,
because what you remarked at the close of our late conversation is
perfectly in my recollection, and convinces me, that my opinions can
only tend to confirm what your own judgment and observation have pointed
out. I am now assured, that when you commit your pupil to the reading of
those heathen authors, whose writings yet exist, though their languages
be dead, you will not suffer his principles to come into collision with
theirs, till they are fundamentally and firmly established upon faith in
revelation; for where that does not reach, all must be error, seeing
that the human understanding, how acute so ever, cannot upon mere
conjecture account for the operations of divine wisdom unless by the aid
of a divine communication. All, who without that aid have attempted to
discuss the question of _first causes_, have puzzled and perplexed
themselves and others. A sound scholar can readily confute their
systems; a shallow one, as you well observed, may be entangled by their
subtilties. In short, they are at the best but blind guides; most of
them are mischievous logicians, and many of them systematic atheists;
for collect their several tenets, and I am warranted to say you shall
find they are all to be classed, either amongst those, who hold the
world to be eternal both as to matter and form, or those, who hold the
matter to be eternal, whilst the form is not. You are no doubt aware,
that neither Aristotle nor Plato admit a creation of the world, or
acknowledge any time when it was not: Aristotle maintaining that it was
an eternal and necessary emanation from the divine nature; Plato, that
it was an eternal and voluntary effect. Now if what God must have willed
from all time he must from all time have done, where is the distinction
betwixt Plato’s volition and Aristotle’s necessity? In these opinions
are to be found all the component parts of modern atheism. The monstrous
system of Spinosa is principally to be traced in the doctrines of the
Eleatic school, of which Xenophanes was the founder; he was succeeded by
Parmenides, Melissus and Zeno of Elea: his doctrines, which were
delivered in verse and with great obscurity, were adopted by Hilpo and
the Megaric philosophers, and these were supposed to be the eternity and
immutability of the world. Strato of Lampsacus, whom Plutarch calls the
greatest of the Peripatetics, made nature inanimate, and at the same
time owned no God but nature. The Stoics had their dogma of the soul of
the world; the Epicureans held that God is matter, or not distinct from
matter; that all things are essentially God, that forms are imaginary
accidents, which have no real existence, and that all things are
substantially the same. I believe I need go no further with the Greek
philosophers, for in these you have nearly the abstract amount of their
opinions, and the sources of all modern infidelity. As for the
cosmogonies of the Phœnicians, Egyptians and Babylonians, which derive
the world from mechanical principles only, they are immediately
introductive of atheism, as Eusebius of Cæsarea observes of
Sanchoniatho, whose fragment he preserved, and Berosus of the Babylonian
cosmogony, of which nation he himself was. To the doctrines of Orpheus
the theologer I have no objection; with him your pupil will be safe.
Hesiod is only fanciful. Of Thales the hylopathian, whose principle of
things was water, I should doubt whether he was theist or atheist; but
of his scholar Anaximander no doubt can be entertained; his system is
professedly atheistical; the same principle descends and may be traced
through Anaximenes, Anaxagoras and Diogenes of Apollonia, in a word,
through all the masters of the Ionic school. Turn to Leucippus and
Democritus, to Epicurus and all, who held the doctrine of atoms, what do
you discover but the blindest ignorance and the grossest atheism? As for
their celebrated physician Hippocrates, who, following the example of
Hippasus and Heraclitus the obscure, held heat or fire to be immortal
and omniscient, in one word God himself, I can only say it would have
been safer to have taken his physic than his philosophy--but I have too
long intruded on your patience, and forbear the rest.

When Edward Wilson perceived that De Lancaster had done speaking, being
unable to discover how this harangue could be brought into use for any
present purpose, and conceiving himself not called upon to say that he
would not put a pupil to read the Greek philosophers, who had not yet
read the first leaf of his Latin grammar, he bowed and was silent.
Philip sate with his hands upon his knees in the attitude of a hearer,
and seemed employed upon a very close examination of his boots, as if in
search of information from them; but they knew just as much, and no
more, of the subject than he himself did.--I wonder why I was called in
to hear all this, he said to himself, who know no more what he has been
talking about than if he had expressed himself in the Hebrew language.
The colonel on the contrary was under no reserve, but turning to De
Lancaster, said, I cannot doubt, my good sir, but that all, which you
have been saying, would be excellent advice to a student far advanced in
his knowledge of the learned languages, but in the instance of my friend
John I presume the time, when it can apply to him, lies yet at a
considerable distance.

You are right, replied De Lancaster, and therefore as I cannot expect to
say it then, I take the liberty to say it now.

The man, whose ridicule could not have been disarmed by the candour of
this temperate reply, must have had a heart very differently made from
that of Colonel Wilson; and as for Edward he immediately found his
voice, and was liberal of his thanks for the instruction he had
received. I shall hardly expect, he said, to do more for my pupil, than
to make him acquainted with some of the best and purest classics, so as
to form his taste, and qualify him to take his part in those circles, in
which he ought to be found: But if he should contract a passion for
literature, I shall bear in mind what you have been inculcating, and
hope it will be my good fortune to find his understanding stored with
such defences, as no false reasoning shall be likely to undermine. This
object will be ever nearest to my heart, and as I am sure I have an
excellent disposition to work upon, I trust your grandson will grow up,
if God gives him life, to be an honour to his name and nation.

I am satisfied, said De Lancaster, and have not another word to offer.

That is lucky, quoth Philip, as his father walked out of the room; for I
am yet in time to take my ride. This was overheard by Colonel Wilson,
and provoked him to say to Philip--If you are going to take your usual
ride to the Abbey, I hope you will recollect by the way your obligations
to a father, the matter of whose discourse may have seemed tedious to
you, but whose motive being zeal for the welfare of your son, ought to
be held in honour and respect.




CHAPTER VI.

_Mr. De Lancaster proposes to revive certain ancient Modes of curing
Diseases._


A project had been conceived by Mr. De Lancaster for calling together an
assembly of the chief neighbouring minstrels on Saint Cecilia’s day, in
which he had the double purpose of patronizing that ancient British
instrument, which he had so much at heart, and at the same time paying a
side-way compliment to his daughter, named after that harmonious saint.

Great preparations were now going forward for celebrating that musical
festival (which was a kind of revival of the ancient eisteddfods) with
becoming splendour. Invitations had been circulated to all the
neighbouring gentry; notices were dispersed over the country for
assembling the most celebrated harpers, and David Williams was warmly
engaged in making daily libations of metheglin to propitiate his muse
for that grand occasion.

The castle hall in the mean time resounded with the hammers of the
workmen, employed in erecting a stage for the minstrels, and in fitting
up seats and benches for the company. The banners were overhauled, taken
down and cleaned, and a great display of these and warlike weapons was
disposed in groups and trophies under the direction of Colonel Wilson.
Cecilia’s province was to superintend supplies, and adapt the several
entertainments to the several degrees of guests, to whom they were
allotted.

Philip De Lancaster still maintained his natural tranquillity, though
from some cause, or it might be from none, he had abated of the
frequency of his visits to the abbey. He gave himself however no trouble
in a business perfectly indifferent to him: the utmost stretch of his
exertions went no further than to the making of an artificial fly for
angling in a stream, where there were no trout, and Wilson had but
little time to spare for chess. Two qualifications Philip had to boast
of; the one was that of being an excellent and unwearied hearer, so long
as any other person would take the trouble of talking; the other, that
of an everlasting sleeper, provided nobody would put him to the trouble
of waking. Between these two happy properties he could dispose both of
day and of night passably well.

His lady in the meanwhile contrived to fill up her hours with sighs and
groans, which were echoed back to her in groans and sighs by
sympathizing Betty. Cecilia visited her at leisure times; her son
occasionally, when called for, and her husband by her desire very
rarely, and of his own accord never. Llewellyn was in regular attendance
and full confidence; he pronounced her case to be atrabilious and
hypochondriac in an extreme degree, and as there could be no doubt of
his being right in deciding on the nature of her complaint, it seemed
rather unlucky that he was so unsucessful in removing it. As far however
as the frequency of attendances and repetition of medicines went, Mr.
Llewellyn was clear in conscience.

One evening, whilst the Colonel and Squire Philip were engaged at chess,
and De Lancaster was tracing out for the edification of Edward Wilson
the route of Solomon’s ships to Ophir for gold, Llewellyn came into the
room to announce his bulletin of the patient above stairs. Philip’s game
was lost, and he had quitted the field; the colonel put the chess-board
by, and all ears were open to the report, of which the sage’s
countenance augured nothing favourable. The question was put to him by
more than one, the answer was--The lady my patient is by no means as I
could wish her.--Then I am afraid, observed the colonel, she is by no
means well.

I hope that does not absolutely follow, said De Lancaster.

She is extremely ill, repeated Llewellyn--She is incurable, cried Philip
with an emphasis and in a tone above his usual pitch.

I think not, replied the father.

She is the most decided hypochondriac I ever met with, resumed the man
of medicine.

Pooh! repeated De Lancaster, if my daughter-in-law has no other
complaint than what is caused by melancholy humours and impeded
circulation, she may be cured at once; the remedy is immediate.

Why; what should cure her? demanded the colonel.

That, which alone can heal the mind and its diseases, said De Lancaster;
music.

Whuh! cried Llewellyn, (whistling out his admiration and contempt in an
under-note, not meant to reach the ears of the old gentleman) This is a
new discovery in medicine, and one more than the dispensary has yet
taken notice of.

Pardon me, resumed De Lancaster, it is no new discovery, but the very
doctrine held by Theophrastus, Aristoxenus and by Pythagoras himself;
the last of whom depended almost entirely on the flute or flagelet for
the expulsion of melancholy; and, as I am no dealer in assertions
without authorities, I shall take the liberty of quoting the very words
of Martianus Capella in his ninth book, which to Mr. Edward Wilson at
least I have no doubt will be familiar, and these they are--_Pythagorei
enim, ferociam animi tibiis aut fidibus mollientes, docuerunt cum
corporibus adhærere nexum fædus animarum_. In this practice however I
must beg leave slightly to differ from the Pythagoreans, and recommend
the harp or lyre in preference, forasmuch as these were the proper
instruments of Apollo, the god of healing, whereas the flute or flagelet
belonged to Tritonia, whose attributes we all know were of a different
description. Let me however do Pythagoras the justice to acknowledge,
that he recommends the lute also as a sedative in the paroxysms of rage
and anger.

Here the colonel interposed, by observing, that what effect a flute, or
a lute, or a flagelet might have upon the passions of mankind he could
not pretend to say, but he apprehended neither one nor the other could
have any thing to do with their diseases, and to this Llewellyn assented
with a significant nod of approbation. De Lancaster had now got amongst
his sophists and grammarians, and committed himself much too far to halt
upon a nod; he proceeded therefore as follows--

Whilst there subsists a sympathy between the senses and the soul, the
intellectual remedy for man must be sought for in harmony. All the
nations under heaven, whether civilized or not, have borne witness to
the powers and effects of music. The Mariandyni, a wild people
inhabiting the confines of Bithynia, made their national music from
pipes, which they formed of the reeds, that grew upon the borders of the
lake Acherusia. The pipe was also the favourite of those mountain
shepherds of Bœotia, called Aonians; whilst the Egyptians with more
ingenuity struck out the complex instrument called Pandura, which was
composed of no less than seven pipes.

We have in our practice, said Llewellyn, an instrument with one pipe,
but I can’t for my soul conceive the use, that can be made of seven.

It was doubtless an instrument of no inconsiderable difficulty to the
performer, replied De Lancaster gravely.

I should not chuse to perform upon it, said the apothecary.

The good old gentleman was in the high road of philology, and kept
steadily on--The characters of nations, said he, are to be traced in the
different characters of their warlike instruments. The Cretans marched
in compact and orderly phalanx to the solemn sound of the harp: the
Lacedemonians rushed into battle to the high-pitched screaming notes of
the shrill-toned fife; whilst the effeminate Sybarites would not move
without the soft accompaniment of their melodious flutes.

But which of all these instruments, said the colonel, is to cure Mrs. De
Lancaster?

Refer that question to Asclepiades, replied De Lancaster, and he will
answer you; Asclepiades will tell you, when the citizens of Prusa were
in actual insurrection, and the city on the point of being laid in
ashes, how he contrived to appease the tumult, and sent them all to
their homes in peace.

But Mrs. De Lancaster is at home already, said Llewellyn, and peaceable
enough, Heaven knows. How does the case of these rioters apply to her?

The colonel saw his friend was staggered, and handsomely turned out to
his relief--It is impossible, he said, to foresee what turn a case may
take, therefore it is well to be armed against accidents. I should be
glad if our good friend would tell us how it was that Asclepiades, whom
I have no means of resorting to, contrived to disperse the mob of
incendiaries at Prusa.

By a song, replied the old gentleman; he dispersed them by the sweet
and soothing melody of a pathetic strain, which assuaged their fury,
and lulled them into peace, as an obstreperous child (for men are only
children of a larger growth) is hushed to sleep by the humming of its
nurse.

I am perfectly satisfied, said the colonel.




CHAPTER VII.

_Mr. Philip De Lancaster determines to adopt the Regimen recommended by
his Father._


The decisive tone, with which Colonel Wilson, at the close of our last
chapter, avowed his perfect satisfaction in De Lancaster’s explanation
of Asclepiades’s receipt for quieting a mob, occasioned such a pause, as
might very probably have put an end to this topic, had not the Reverend
Edward Wilson availed himself of the general silence to revive it. He
had been closely attentive to the progress of this whimsical
dissertation, and sensibly annoyed by the frequent interruptions it had
met with, whereupon, having watched his opportunity, he said--Permit me
to observe, that I, for one of Mr. De Lancaster’s hearers, can never be
perfectly satisfied so long as he shall be pleased to continue to us the
gratification of a discourse, at once so new, and, to me at least, so
highly entertaining and instructive. In several passages of it even my
small share of reading enables me to recognize some of the authorities
he has referred to, and I have no doubt but he is equally warranted in
all others, where I am not able to follow him; and allow me to remark,
that if his information does not in every point apply to the particular
case of the hypochondriac lady, for whose recovery we are interested,
yet even in those points of occasional aberration from the subject,
there is matter well worthy of our attention, and I therefore hope Mr.
De Lancaster will have the goodness to proceed with his dissertation on
the effects of music, as recorded and attested by the ancient writers.

Reverend sir, said Robert De Lancaster, your remarks are at once so
candid, and your request so flattering to me, that I will contract what
I have further to say in such a manner as shall not weary you, and I
will ground it upon such authorities as shall not mislead you. Damon,
the Pythagorean philosopher, a man not less to be relied upon for his
veracity, than for his friendship and fidelity, by the simple recitation
of the spondean hymn allayed a drunken fray in the streets of Syracuse,
when raging at the height, in an instant, and as it were by magic.

And pray, said the colonel, what kind of composition was the spondean
hymn?

It was a hymn, replied De Lancaster, performed by the priests and
minstrels in the heathen temples as a prelude to the ceremony of
sacrifice, and it was called spondean, as consisting of such syllables
only, which gives us to understand the solemn character of the
composition, the object of which was to engage the attention, and
conciliate the favour of their deities, whilst the incense was in
operation.

If it could do that, said the colonel, and make dead idols serviceable,
I can’t wonder it should make drunken insurgents sober.

Sir--replied the expounder, (lengthening out the word into a note of
something like asperity) You have not heard me out, else I should have
told you, that ancient sages cured fevers, fits of melancholy, phrensy,
nay, even bodily wounds, by the sanative and enchanting power of song.
Who, that has but dipped into their remedies, can be ignorant, that soft
airs, well executed on the flute, were found to be a never-failing cure
for the sciatica, or hip-gout, as it is called? A host of witnesses
conspire to testify to the truth of what I tell you. Can it have escaped
the notice of any well-read scholar by what means Theophrastus found a
remedy for every malady, every molestation, that could disorder and
disturb the health and temperature of the human mind? Sir, he had an
instrument appropriated to every mental complaint, a pipe tuned to the
pitch of every passion, high or low, flat or sharp. Xenocrates brought
men stark mad to their senses. Thales of Crete drove away fevers, nay,
even the plague itself, by music. Erophilus regulated the pulsation of
the hearts of his patients by the cadences and time-keeping of his lyre.

We do that quite as correctly by our watches, said Llewellyn.

De Lancaster took no notice of this, but proceeded--Can you any longer
wonder that the sage, who has made sympathy his study, and is versed in
the science of these harmonious modulations and their respective
energies, should effect those cures, which are recorded of them, and
which, when explained and understood, are no longer hard to be believed?
As for what is fabled of Amphion, Orpheus and others, who by the united
powers of music and legislative poetry succeeded in reforming and
civilizing their barbarous contemporaries, I would not have you to
suppose I cannot distinguish allegory from fact. In the same light I
regard the account, which Suidas gives us of the philosopher Plato, who
was reported to have been begotten of his mother in a vision by the
melody of the harp of Apollo.

I should be inclined to doubt that, said the colonel.

Nay, resumed De Lancaster, there is no occasion to debate what nobody
wishes you to believe. You cannot but perceive it is merely an
allegorical compliment to the genius of that extraordinary person, whose
deep researches into the mysterious theory of sounds and numbers having
enabled him to speculate in a very ingenious manner upon the doctrine
of harmony, as connected with the movements of the celestial spheres,
and also with the human soul even after death, was feigned to have been
the very offspring of that harmony, which he developed and applied.
These legends, and the like of these, I know how to appreciate, and with
what latitude they are to be received; at the same time I am not to be
shaken in my confidence, when relying on the ancients, who studied music
as a science, whilst we do little more than practise it as an art, and
of course stand in the like relation to them as fiddlers do to
philosophers. In short, my friends, it is not man alone that is the
slave of harmony, but the whole brute creation also: if stags can be
allured by the pipe; if the fishes in the Alexandrian lake will
surrender themselves to the song of the fisherman; if the hyperborean
swan, if the birds of the air, at once so fearful and so free; nay, if
even the wild elephant of India, and the ear-stricken inhabitants of the
ocean, will yield themselves up to the minstrel, who will tell me, that
a mere moping hypochondriac, like my poor daughter-in-law, might not be
cured of her distempered fancy by the harp of David Williams?

De Lancaster having closed his argument, and dismissed his witnesses,
the audience broke up; Llewellyn repaired to his patient, Edward Wilson
to his pupil, and Philip whispered to the colonel, that he should be
glad to have a few minutes talk with him in private. This was instantly
complied with, and Philip opened the important conference, as follows--

I should wish to know, colonel, if you attended to what my father has
been saying?

The colonel had attended.

I am glad of it, said Philip, for I was a little absent now and then,
and have not carried much of it away. But do you believe all those
wonderful things, that he has told us, about music?

I perfectly believe that your father has told nothing about music, but
what he has vouchers for, though I don’t know where to look for them.

Nor I neither, Heaven knows, said Philip, for I have no taste for music,
nor can distinguish between one tune and another, except as it is either
loud or soft: if it is the first, it deafens and distracts me; if the
latter, it puts me to sleep. I don’t suppose it is in the art of man to
teach me to sing or play a single tune, though it were to save my life.

That won’t quite decide the question however, my good friend; for music
certainly can charm others, though it has no charms for you. What I have
seen and witnessed I believe; what I am told I pause upon. Martial music
will animate martial men, and not them only, but the horses also, which
they ride to battle: hounds are sensible to the shouts of the hunter,
and the whole race of dogs to the voices of their masters: birds can be
taught tunes, though you and I cannot, and there are doubtless great and
extraordinary powers in musical sounds, though perhaps all that is said
of those powers may not be exactly as it is stated.

I should suppose not; for if I was to believe that David Williams with
his harp could cure my melancholy dame of her megrims, don’t you think I
ought in conscience to make the trial?

I think at least, friend Philip, that the trial would do her no harm;
for if she did not like to hear his music, she could easily put a stop
to it.

But suppose, colonel, that she should like to hear it; and suppose also
for a moment it should have the same effect upon her as Apollo’s harp
had upon Plato’s mother, whereabouts should I be with a whole nursery of
harp-begotten brats to provide for, conscious at the same time that I
had not touched a single string of the instrument?

That would be rather hard upon you I confess.

Lord love you, colonel, even worse things than that might come to pass.
I am very comfortable as I am, but who can tell what a few merry jigs
upon the harp may do? They might be the ruin of my peace for ever.

Never fear, my good friend, replied the colonel. Depend upon it, you are
in no danger.

Well! if you think so, said Philip, I will go to David Williams, and put
my wife under a course of serenades directly: It may perhaps please the
Lord, that they shall do her neither good nor harm.

So saying, Philip left the room, and Wilson went to superintend his
workmen in the hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

I here close the third book and first volume of my history, and,
availing myself of the licence I have assumed in the two preceding
books, I stop progress to look back upon what hitherto has been done: no
mighty matter I confess; yet it has put me to the labour of turning over
many a crabbed antiquated author to furnish out materials for these
pages; and to what purpose? Wiser perhaps I had been to have followed
the example of those easy gentlemen, who write without any pains what
you read without any profit.

What recommendation would it be of this book, if humbly I should say, it
can do no harm? But if vainly I avowed that it was my object and
endeavour to do good, I might indeed speak the truth as to my wishes,
but I should palpably disguise my expectations. It will do no good.
Reformers are as unpopular as informers; the medicine, which nobody will
take, can do nobody any service. When I witness the avidity, with which
men will read a thing called a novel, wherein the characters of their
friends are libelled, what folly would it be to suppose they will
countenance an attempt to impress them with more kindness for their
fellow-creatures than they are disposed to entertain, or will suffer
themselves to be persuaded, that their fellow-creatures merit?

I have been too long acquainted with you, my dear candid readers, to
trouble you with any compliments, or solicit you for any favours. I have
only to say, that I am doing my utmost to amuse you, and if you shall
lay down this volume with any appetite for the second, I hope you will
not find that my exertions flag.


                       END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


                  WRIGHT, Printer, St. John’s Square.

       Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

                 been mispent=> been misspent {pg 24}

 vaulted casmate so fortified=> vaulted casemate so fortified {pg 57}

            the same tranport=> the same transport {pg 166}

          bodily acheivements=> bodily achievements {pg 182}

                 had recieved=> had received {pg 215}




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER: A NOVEL; VOL. I ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of John de Lancaster: a novel; vol. II
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: John de Lancaster: a novel; vol. II


Author: Richard Cumberland

Release date: September 27, 2022 [eBook #69056]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Lackington, Allen, and Co, 1809

Credits: Sonya Schermann, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER: A NOVEL; VOL. II ***





                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.

                              VOLUME II.




                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.

                               A NOVEL.

                                  BY

                      _RICHARD CUMBERLAND, ESQ._

                           IN THREE VOLUMES.

                               VOL. II.


                               _LONDON_:

                PRINTED FOR LACKINGTON, ALLEN, AND CO.
                         TEMPLE OF THE MUSES,
                           FINSBURY-SQUARE.

                                 1809.


           Harding and Wright, Printers, St. John’s Square.




                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.




                            BOOK THE FIRST.




CHAPTER I.

_The Experiment, as resolved upon by Mr. Philip De Lancaster, is made._


When Philip’s confidential interview with Colonel Wilson was concluded,
he directly bent his course to the chamber of David Williams. It was a
station equally well adapted to the studies of the poet, the astronomer
or the musician, for it was in the high road to the stars, at the very
top of the loftiest turret of Kray-Castle, and far enough exalted above
every living thing, that grovelled on the earth. It is to be lamented
that the fine prospect it commanded was no recommendation of it to blind
David, but the advantages it might have offered to him of inhaling the
refreshing breezes in their greatest purity would have compensated in
part, had it not so happened, that its only casement was not made to
open.

When Philip, whom the love of prospect never could have tempted to
ascend this winding staircase, had with infinite pains landed himself in
David’s airey, the twilight was drawing on, and the sun sinking red
towards his chamber in the west. He found the minstrel seated in his
only chair with his harp between his knees, and on the table before him
his pitcher, which, though of a capacious girth, had been drained of its
contents.

Philip having accosted him and made known his errand in few words, the
old man rose from his seat, and stood with his left hand resting on his
harp, whilst his right was pressed respectfully on his breast--Be it, he
replied, as the son of my patron hath commanded! When David Williams
shall hesitate to obey the heir of this castle, and the descendant of
the ever-honoured De Lancasters, this heart must have forfeited its
duty, and this hand forgotten its accustomed office. Although my brain
is even now in travail and only waits the mollifying aid of another jug
to bring forth, behold me ready! Speak the word only for my son David to
bear my harp, and lead me to the apartment of the lady your spouse, I
will incontinently set forward.

Thank you, my old friend, cried Philip! You do it with good will, and
that is every thing. But what think you of the experiment? Do you hold
with my father in opinion that by the melody of the harp you can drive
the evil spirit out of Mrs. De Lancaster?

Who drove the evil spirit out of Saul, replied the minstrel?

You have said it sure enough, rejoined Philip; but we must proceed
cautiously, and not give her too much of it. A short strain, and
something in her own way, of the pensive cast--You have the name, the
instrument and the art of the royal minstrel, but recollect the peril he
was in, and be aware how you proceed too far in stirring up and
stimulating the passions.

Thus having said, he departed, whilst the hoary-headed enthusiast seized
his harp, and full of the muse called amain for his son to lead him.

Whilst this was passing in the turret, Cecilia with our young hero had
paid an evening visit to Mrs. De Lancaster in her apartment. She was
more than fancifully ill, for her sunken eyes and hectic looks too
plainly indicated a constitution breaking up. Her spirits however were
just now in that kind of nervous flutter, which carries a resemblance to
gaiety, and she was more than ordinarily communicative and disposed to
talk.

Their conversation turned upon the preparations making for the
approaching festival--You will look in upon us I hope, said Cecilia; and
if you apprehend the company will be too much for you, I’ll have the
latticed gallery in the hall kept private, where nobody will molest you.
There will be music, sister, and I flatter myself you have no dislike to
that.

None, replied Mrs. De Lancaster, to music, properly so called, but
infinite dislike and horror for trumpets and cudgel-playing, and noisy
bawling drunkards, who shout over their cups, and rattle them on the
table by way of applause: these are generally the accompaniments of a
Welch carousal.

You have none such to expect with us, believe me, said Cecilia. We shall
not make it a Saint David’s day, take my word for it.

No, cried the invalid, one such as I experienced, when this poor thing
was hurried into the world, has been one too many, and left me more to
struggle with than I shall ever overcome--and here her spirits sunk, and
her countenance assumed a melancholy cast, whilst she turned her languid
eyes upon her son.

I am sorry to hear you talk thus, the gentle Cecilia replied: I was in
hopes, that now when all the troubles of that time are over, you would
have looked back to that day as a day of happiness and comfort. I am
persuaded that your son will never give you cause to regret what you
suffered for his sake; and now that he is in train to receive an
excellent education, what may we not expect from the brilliancy of his
talents, and the virtues of his heart?

Yes, yes, she cried with a desponding sigh, I know what I am to expect
from the education he will receive. Every thing I dare say they will
teach him but humility and that discernment, which might constitute his
happiness. He will split upon the rock, that was so fatal to his
wretched mother, and they, on whom his destiny depends, will immolate
another victim to ambitious fortune and the pride of family.

John’s ready apprehension caught the words, understood their meaning,
and in that instant he resolved to bring them to an explanation,
whenever opportunity might favour his design. She had spoken these words
with a degree of energy, that apparently exhausted her--Poor fellow, she
now said in a faint voice, and reached out her hand, as if inviting him
to approach; he sprung from his seat, respectfully received her hand and
pressed it to his lips--Am I not to blame, she said, addressing herself
to Cecilia, for thus indulging my affection for an object, from whom I
must so soon be parted?

No, my dear sister, replied Cecilia; you are only to blame for
indulging those melancholy thoughts. Exert yourself for the recovery of
your health and spirits; seek amusement in the company of your friends,
resort to air and exercise in the place of medicine and confinement, and
you may live to see all your apprehensions vanish, and your son made
happy, (so may Heaven grant it!) to the completion of your warmest
wishes.

Ah my kind comforter, said the mother, I know full well that medicine
cannot cure my complaints nor exertion restore my spirits. I am sensible
it is not worth my while to seek for a recovery any where, for sure
enough it is no where to be found; yet I will acknowledge to you, that
unless I were obstinately resolved to devote myself to death, I must not
meet another winter in this country. The soft climates of Lisbon or the
South of France may give me a few more weeks; and though I have long
ceased from enjoying life, I am not reconciled in my conscience to the
neglect of any reasonable means for prolonging it. Besides, as I have
all the disposition in the world not to disturb Mr. De Lancaster’s
repose with certain ceremonials, in which he might think it incumbent on
him to take a part, I shall only trouble him to attend upon me to the
sea-side, and leave it to other people in another country to follow me
to the grave. I perceive myself exactly treading in the steps of my poor
mother, and can easily foresee where they will lead me. When she was at
my time of life, (as I well recollect,) she was affected just in the
same manner as I am. My father talked to her as you talk now to me: he
was a kind and tender husband, which, allow me to observe, was one more
comfort in her lot than I have to boast of. She had no child but me, and
I was about John’s age when I saw her for the last time. She was not in
the habit of bestowing any extraordinary caresses upon me, and I seldom
was admitted to her, for her spirits did not allow of it. Upon this last
meeting however she was extremely kind to me, and the circumstance is
the more strongly impressed upon my memory on account of a very singular
occurrence, which I can sometimes reflect upon till I fancy myself in
her very situation, and hearing the same sounds, as seemed to summon my
poor mother to her death-bed.

Of what sort were those sounds? Cecilia asked--Of the most seraphic
sort, Mrs. De Lancaster replied, as she described them; such as we may
conceive the angels to excite, when they waft a soul into bliss.

By one of those extraordinary coincidences, that sometimes occur, it so
chanced, that in the very moment, whilst Mrs. De Lancaster, was
describing these strains, heard by her mother before death, David
Williams, who had planted himself in the adjoining gallery, gave a
flourish on his harp. It was not one of those imposing preludes, that
are calculated to display the execution of the master; it was rather
meant to invite attention by its melody, than to arrest it by its
violence.

Hark! cried Mrs. De Lancaster; do you hear those sounds?--It is only
David Williams, Cecilia replied, going to serenade us. If you wish it
to be stopped, I’ll tell him--Upon no account, answered the other, I am
convinced these things do not happen by chance; and whether the music is
produced by natural or supernatural means, I entreat you not to attempt
at interrupting it.

Immediately a symphony was played most exquisitely sweet and melodious:
the minstrel never was in a happier moment; young John in the mean time
kept hold of his mother’s hand, whilst the strain swelled and sunk at
times in cadence so enchanting, as might remind Mrs. De Lancaster of
those seraphic airs, which were supposed to have visited her dying
mother, especially when the following words were distinctly heard, as
the blind minstrel chanted them forth to the accompaniment of his harp.

    “What art thou, Death; that we should fear
      The shadow of a shade?
    What’s in thy name, that meets the ear,
      Of which to be afraid?

    Thou art not care, thou art not pain,
      But thou art rest and peace:
    ’Tis thou can’st make our terrors vain,
      And bid our torments cease.

    Thy hand can draw the rankling thorn
      From out the wounded breast;
    Thy curtain screens the wretch forlorn,
      Thy pallet gives him rest.

    Misfortune’s sting, Affliction’s throes,
      Detraction’s pois’nous breath,
    The world itself and all its woes
      Are swallow’d up in death.”




CHAPTER II.

_Mr. De Lancaster discourses upon the Tactics of the Ancients._


Whilst David Williams was chanting the extemporaneous lay, with which we
concluded the foregoing chapter, the door between him and Mrs. De
Lancaster was ajar; the gallery, in which he was playing, was admirably
disposed for music, and every note came to the ear, mellowed by the
distance without being lost in its passage. The strain was of a
character so simple, and the harmony so pure and flowing in it’s course,
without any of those capricious and false ornaments, which are too often
resorted to, that both the movement and the matter were intelligible to
the hearers, till at the close it burst into such a display of
execution, as called forth all the powers of the instrument, and set off
the art of the master in its highest style of excellence.

When Mrs. De Lancaster perceived that the performance was concluded,
John was told to open the door, and upon his entering the gallery, the
old minstrel was discovered sitting in deep meditation, with his arms
folded round his harp, and his head resting upon the frame of it, whilst
his white locks, long and flowing, hung profusely over his forehead, and
entirely shaded his countenance. He had placed himself opposite to an
antique bow-window, through which a ruddy gleam from the descending sun
directly smote upon his figure, and threw it into tints, that would have
been a study for Rembrandt or Bassan.

The mother and aunt of our hero, who had now joined him in the gallery,
stood for a while contemplating the striking effect, which his attitude
produced. At length Mrs. De Lancaster said--We are obliged to you, Mr.
Williams, for your very charming music: may I ask who is the author of
it?

He, who is the author of my being, he replied, rising up and shaking the
locks from off his forehead; He, that endowed me with a soul, inspired
me with the love of harmony, and what He inspires, I with all humble
devotion endeavour to express.

Can you repeat those passages again?

Lady I cannot. It was not from memory that I played them, and having
played them, I no longer keep them in remembrance. When the approaching
festival shall call on me for my exertions, I hope to produce something
more worthy of your commendation.

Did you come hither of your own accord?

I never come to ladies’ chambers of my own accord.

To whom beside yourself am I indebted for this entertainment?

The son of my patron, your spouse, commanded me to play to you.

Did he so? said Mrs. De Lancaster. I will trouble you no further. She
then wished Cecilia a good night, pressed the hand of her son in token
of a farewel, and turned into her chamber.

Whilst this was passing above stairs, the venerable chief of the De
Lancasters was sitting and conversing over his coffee with Colonel
Wilson and his sons Henry and Edward; for the elder of these brothers,
who was captain of a troop of dragoons, had taken advantage of a few
days furlough to pay a visit to his father before he joined his regiment
in Ireland. Henry was an amiable and well-informed young man, and had
the character of being a very gallant and good officer. De Lancaster
loved a soldier, and was fond of talking to every man upon professional
topics: Henry was highly entertained with the singularity of his
character, and had won the old gentleman’s heart by listening to his
dissertations with the most flattering attention, asking questions and
throwing in remarks occasionally, which proved him to have taken a
lively interest in the subject under discussion, and to be a hearer to
the heart’s content of his communicative host.

Robert De Lancaster had been calling to mind the several passages, that
occurred to him in the grammarians, respecting ancient tactics, and had
gone back to the Trojan war for the purpose of remarking to Captain
Henry, that it did not appear that the Greeks had any cavalry in the
besieging army, except the horses, which they harnessed to their
chariots: that even in the battle of Marathon there were no horse in the
Athenian army, and that it was not till they repulsed Xerxes and were at
peace, that they raised any body of cavalry, and then only three
hundred.

Henry let him proceed without interruption till he got amongst the Roman
cohorts, who, he informed him, did not use saddles till they copied them
from the Germans, and as for stirrups, they had no word, that answered
to them in their language. He remarked that Franciscus Philelphus, who
lived in the time of the fathers, had indeed coined the word _Stapeda_
to express a stirrup, but Budæus in after times had improved upon it by
substituting the compound term of _Subex pedancus_, which he clearly
preferred, and for which he gave Budæus all due credit.

Mr. De Lancaster seemed very candidly disposed to recommend the fashion
of riding without saddle or stirrups, though he himself used both in
their greatest amplitude and richest splendor; the seat of the one being
of blue velvet, and the materials of the other brass proudly gilt. He
even doubted if the Numidians were not the best models for cavalry,
forasmuch as they made use neither of saddle nor bridle, but turned and
stopped their horses with their canes or switches, whilst the Teutonic
horsemen were so adroit in shifting from horse to horse, that they
oftentimes charged their enemy double-mounted; nay, they could manage
four, as Homer witnesses, and he (Mr. De Lancaster) had authority to say
that one of their kings named Teutobocchus, was so excellent a rider,
that he could keep six horses alternately under him, and bring them all
into action at the same time, which he conceived was a very great
advantage to that warlike monarch in a charge. He begged however to be
understood as saying this under correction of the captain’s better
judgment, and seemed to wait in expectation of his decision upon the
reference.

The captain properly observed, that, if King Teutobocchus had a horse
killed under him, he certainly had his choice of five yet left; but if
he was killed himself he stood the chance of leaving six without a rider
to fall into the enemy’s hands; so that much might be said on both
sides.

This answer, which decided neither for nor against King Teutobocchus and
his six chargers, left De Lancaster at liberty to hold to his opinion,
and proceed with his discourse, which now went back to the Romans, who,
till they used saddles, always vaulted on their steeds, training the
young recruits to the practice by drilling them upon wooden horses, till
they were able to mount and dismount upon either side with all their
accoutrements, in which manœuvre the great Pompey was said to be so
expert, as to perform it at full speed, drawing and returning his sword
at the same time with the utmost expedition and correctness. After the
barbarous introduction of saddles Mr. De Lancaster acknowledged that the
Roman horseman was forced to mount either by the aid of the hand, or by
practising his horse to kneel. He took notice that the sword-belt slung
over the shoulder was conformable to ancient custom, but he doubted
whether the sword ought not to be slung on the right side, as the Romans
wore it, and not of so enormous a length, as it was carried to by the
present fashion. He confessed that the Roman trooper with his massy
spear, a shield slung to his horse’s side, a case of three or four stout
javelins with broad blades, and with his helmet and coat of mail, must
have been a cumbrous load upon his charger, and he admitted that his
movements and evolutions could not be very rapid. Speaking of the
standards of the cavalry, he said they were very generally of purple
with the name of the commander worked in gold; though he was aware they
afterwards introduced the figure of the dragon, richly embroidered after
the fashion of the Asiatics. That the devices they wore on their helmets
were of various sorts, according to the fancy of the wearer, but plumes
of peacock’s feathers could only be mounted on the crests of generals of
the highest rank and description. Pyrrhus’s crest was distinguished by
the horns of the goat curiously modelled in fine gold.

He informed his hearers, that when the Roman cavalry were ordered to the
charge, the chief trumpeter, whose station was beside the general,
sounded to make ready; this was answered by the band posted near the
eagles, and when the horse were going down all the trumpets in the army
sounded together, whilst the soldiers shouted out the word for battle,
and that word, though not precisely recorded, he had reason to believe
was FERI! answering to our _Strike home!_ A chorus so tremendous, that
Cato says--The cry of our soldiers is more terrifying to the enemy than
their swords. As for the Greeks, it is well known, he observed, that
they came down to the charge shrieking out their insulting ALALAGMOS! Of
this cry Pân was the inventor, and the terror it created was thence
called Panic: the same Greeks had their Pæan before battle, called the
Aggressive Pæan, and another after battle, called the Pæan of Victory.

With respect to what we call specifically--_the word_ or parolle--that
was given out by the general at pleasure, and was alway of some cheering
and auspicious import--as that of Cæsar, which he made use of in his
African campaign, FELICITAS! that of Brutus, LIBERTAS! that of Augustus,
APOLLO! whilst Cyrus gave out with the signal for battle--JUPITER
SOCIUS, DUX, SERVATOR! _Jupiter, our comrade, our leader, our
preserver!_




CHAPTER III.

_Mr. De Lancaster relates some curious Properties peculiar to certain
Islands._


Mr. De Lancaster had brought his dissertation to a conclusion, when
Philip entered the room: he had been told by David Williams what effect
his experiment had produced, and as it had brought Mrs. De Lancaster out
of her chamber, he had begun to apprehend greater consequences from its
operation, than he was either prepared to encounter, or disposed to
wish, till upon meeting Mr. Llewellyn he was informed by that sagacious
gentleman, that the surprise, into which his patient had been thrown by
the unexpected serenade of David’s harp had proved extremely prejudicial
to her health, and that he thought it of the last consequence to her
life, never to expose her to such dangerous experiments again--I cannot
for my soul conceive, said that learned sage, what expectations you
could form from such a ridiculous chimæra, but to hurry her into fits,
which you have done, and to drive her out of her senses which very
possibly you may do. If I am thus to be interrupted in the management of
her case, how am I to be answerable for her life?

Thus rebuffed by the anti-musical doctor, Philip sought refuge in the
society of the company below stairs from the persecution of those above.
He sate silent and dull, but as this was nothing extraordinary on his
part, nobody concerned themselves about him.

Mr. De Lancaster asked Captain Wilson in what province of Ireland his
regiment was quartered, and upon being answered that it was in Munster,
he gravely observed, that he would then be upon the spot, where, if so
disposed, he might enquire into the truth of the extraordinary
properties recorded by Giraldus Cambrensis of a certain island in the
aforesaid province which, if related by any other than a historian of
his established character for veracity and research, might have
staggered all credulity.

Upon Henry’s desiring to be informed what those properties were--he
replied, I premised that they were extraordinary, and I own to you they
require confirmation, for Giraldus deliberately tells us, that there is
an island in that province, known in his time, and in fact from the time
of Saint Patrick, into which no woman, nor any female creature living,
could enter.

Well done, Giraldus! cried the colonel, that is an interesting discovery
for married men.

A blessed one--said Philip in an under voice.

I hardly think I shall be able to find it, said the captain, and if I
do, I don’t believe I shall chuse it for my head quarters.

It is fitter for a hermitage or a monkish convent, Edward observed.

Hold, cried De Lancaster, I have Giraldus on the table, and here he
tells us of an island, where no woman can be delivered of a child.

Pooh! said the colonel, he is an old woman himself, and can be delivered
of nothing but lies.

Hold, resumed the expounder of Giraldus; here is another island, which
is partly inhabited by good, and partly by evil spirits.

All islands are alike for that, said the colonel.

Have a little patience; we have not done yet with Giraldus’s islands,
for here is one, where dead bodies cannot putrefy; and look! here is
another, that outgoes all the others, where nobody can ever die--Mark
his words--_Nemo unquam moritur, unquam mortuus fuit, vel morte naturali
mori potuit_.

Excellent Giraldus! exclaimed the colonel; if he does but make out his
immortal island to be that which women cannot enter, the grand
desideratum is obtained.

He does not say that, replied De Lancaster.

Then he had better have said nothing about it, Philip cried out from his
corner, for fear our wives should find it out.

At this instant our hero John made his appearance with a most flaming
and tremendous sketch of David Williams, playing on his harp at
sun-down, as he had seen him in the gallery. This was the first unlucky
start of John’s genius in the branch of portrait-painting, and though it
was in the grand gusto of Michael Angelo, it was not quite so good as
Michael Angelo would have made it, though John had bestowed as much red
ink upon it as would have served a merchant’s clerk for a twelve-month.

At the sight of that red ink, so profusely squandered, Philip betrayed
no small alarm, and demanded where he got it. John had found a bottle of
it upon the chimney-piece in his father’s bedroom.

It is not ink, cried Philip; it is the blood of Saint Januarius, and you
have ruined me.

The vehemence of Philip’s exclamation, and the horror of his
countenance, were too ridiculous to be withstood, and even the gravity
of the grandfather was not proof against the laugh.

Hollah! friend John, cried the colonel, you have drawn a devil in the
blood of a saint.

John demanded how long the saint had been dead; and the colonel
answered at a guess, that it was not much more than a thousand years,
but the monks could bring his blood to life again, when they had
occasion for a vial of red ink.

You may make a laughing matter of it, said Philip, but I got it with
considerable difficulty, and not at the price of red ink, assure
yourself.

And what was the use of it, when you had got it, said the colonel?

Sir, replied poor Philip with much solemnity--It has various uses: it is
a preservative against storms by sea or land; against thunder and
lightning; it guards your house from fire, keeps off evil spirits, and
prevents or cures diseases.

And so it may still, said the old gentleman, for the sight of John’s
drawing brings to my recollection the famous recipe, which John De
Gaddesden has bequeathed to us for those, who may be seized with that
terrible disorder the small-pox, and I believe I can give it to you in
his own, or very nearly his own, words--“after the eruption of the small
pox, says that ancient and learned leech, cause the whole body of your
patient to be wrapt in scarlet, or in any other red envelope, and
command every thing about the couch of the sick person to be made red,
for this will be found an excellent and speedy cure. It was in this
manner, he adds, I treated the son of the noble King Edward the Second
of England, when he had the small pox, and I cured him without leaving
any marks.”--This being granted, my grandson’s performance, although not
eminently meritorious for its art, may yet be turned to beneficial
purposes, and Saint Januarius may share the credit of them with John De
Gaddesden.

Philip, who perceived he was not likely to receive any redress, walked
away to meditate in silence over the loss of his miraculous vial. John
was called up to his mother’s apartment, and when there admitted, Betty
was ordered to retire, and she addressed him as will be found in the
following chapter.




CHAPTER IV.

_Our Hero has an Interview with his Mother._


When John had entered his mother’s chamber, and presented himself to
her, she said--As I know that I must prepare myself to meet that
summons, from which no mortal is exempt, sit down by me, and hear what I
have to say; for whilst my senses hold I wish to communicate to you some
particulars, which it imports you to be apprised of, and as they are of
a secret nature, I must rely upon your discretion for understanding what
is due to the confidence, that I am about to repose in you. I suspect
you have been informed by the soldier, who died in this house, of my
attachment to his master Captain Jones--(’Tis very well: I understand
your signal)--He has told you, and I tell you now again, that my whole
life has been embittered by the disappointment and affliction, which I
endured, when rigid honour on his part, and over-ruling duty on mine,
tore me from the arms of that beloved man, and threw me into those of
your unfeeling father. Great as my affection was for Captain Jones, and
implicit as my trust, yet I take it on my soul to assure you, that our
connection was in the strictest sense correctly pure, and after I was
married I never had the fortitude to speak to him, or even see his face.
I state this to you, my dear child, not only that you may have it in
your power conscientiously to put to silence and dismiss all
insinuations against my honour, but also more especially to arm your
mind for ever against those alarming fancies, that might else occur to
you, if in any future period of time the charms, the virtues and
endowments of the daughter should engage your heart, as those of the
father captivated mine.

This angelic girl, (for as such she is represented to me) now lives
with Mrs. Jennings at Denbigh, who has the care of her education, and
on whom my father has settled an annuity for that purpose. I have
bequeathed to Amelia Jones two thousand pounds by will, which is the
only sum I can at present call my own; but if, by the will of
providence, your grandfather should be suddenly taken off before I die,
whatever I may in that case inherit from him I shall leave entirely to
you, and recommend this interesting relict of my lamented friend to your
bounty and protection. And now before I reveal to you the wish, that
lies deepest at my heart, let me furnish you with the means of being
known to her. This case contains a miniature of her father in enamel,
admirably painted, and on the reverse of it under a crystal there is a
lock of his hair. Dear as this relic has been, and still is, to me,
alas! I never more must look upon it, I could not bear it, and must now
endeavour to employ my thoughts in other meditations; take it, my son,
and as your gift present it to Amelia; she will thank you; and if her
gentle character should gain an early interest in your youthful heart,
think of your wretched mother, and resolve against the fatal sacrifice,
that I have made to fortune and connections: what are they, if your
choice goes not with them? what but misery, entailed upon you by the
base surrender of your own natural rights? Ah! my poor child, could I
but cherish a consoling hope, that you will summon courage to assert
those natural rights, and resolutely shun the torrent of those sordid
importunities, that will assail you, I could die in peace.

Live then, replied our hero, live, my mother, in that confirmed
assurance, and believe nothing can shake my fixt determination to follow
my free choice in that event, which must decide my happiness for life.
Fortune I do not want, and for that idle pride, which pedigree entails
on some, who have no other merit, I despise it; all are my equals, who
are not debased in character and conduct: as for Amelia Jones, (forgive
me, madam) being my father’s son, and she the daughter of parents by
their virtues ennobled, I look up to her as my superior; and when I have
the happiness to present to her this valuable relic of her father, I can
well believe my second visit will confirm the impression I received upon
my first.

What do you tell me? Have you visited and seen Amelia?

I should have told you that before, but was afraid the circumstances,
that produced that interview, might agitate and discompose your spirits.

No, no, relate them. If Amelia gave the impression you describe, ’tis
all I wish, ’tis all I pray for.

She appeared, he replied, in loveliness of person, mind and manners to
merit their description, who report her to you as an angelic girl. My
plea for visiting her was to deliver into her hands the wedding ring,
worn by her mother, and sent to her by her father in the care of the
poor soldier, his servant, who on his death-bed entrusted it to me. In
the execution of this delicate commission I was so dazzled, and my
senses were so engrossed by the appearance of an object, beautiful and
impressive beyond my expectations, that the abrupt and awkward manner,
in which I introduced my business, occasioned a surprise on her part,
which for a time overthrew her spirits and deprived me of her company.
In the mean time whilst I was contemplating her father’s portrait, which
hung opposite to me, and in a kind of rhapsody, that I could not
controul, pledging my protection to his lovely daughter, behold, she
stood beside me; and before I could recollect myself I had clasped her
in my arms. Shocked at myself for an action so audacious, I fled out of
the house, and by a note to Mrs. Jennings endeavoured to apologize and
asked forgiveness: it was granted to me on the part of Amelia, but Mrs.
Jennings by her answer to my note imposed upon me the severe condition
of forbearing to intrude upon her charge in the like manner any more.
This I have hitherto obeyed; how then shall I fulfil your orders, and
present this relic to Amelia?

You must write to Mrs. Jennings, state what your commission is, and ask
leave to wait upon her charge. When you have done this, shew me your
letter, and, if I am able, I will add a postscript. Now, my dear son,
beloved of my heart, farewel! my feeble spirits can no longer bear the
agitation this discourse has caused. I am not used to joy; it overcomes
me--send assistance to me!




CHAPTER V.

_Preparations for celebrating the Assembly of the Minstrels at Kray
Castle._


The day was now come, when the assembly of the minstrels was to be
celebrated at Kray Castle. Every body was alert: the great hall showed
like an arsenal, hung round with trophies of armour, and decorated with
the banners of the family, upon which the emblem of the winged harp held
its station paramount.

The natives, whether inhabitants of mountain or of vale, flocked from
all parts to the spectacle. No minstrel, who had any ambition to
distinguish himself, neglected the invitation. The domestics of the
castle were arrayed in their gala liveries of orange-tawney, new for the
occasion. All hands were busy in the kitchen, which was of conventual
size, and the savory steam ascended to the vaulted roof in clouds of
stomach-stirring odour. The cellar, though provided with a double tier
of potent ordnance, was formidably menaced by the numbers of the
assailants. Cecilia, the moving spring of all operations, had taken her
measures so providently, and given out her orders with such precision,
that all things went on in their respective departments with consummate
regularity.

Mrs. De Lancaster, still languid, though in spirits less depressed, was
incapable of taking any share in the festivities of the day, and
confined herself to her apartment. The worthy old colonel had put
himself in full uniform for the occasion, and Captain Henry Wilson,
brilliant as if accoutred for a review, appeared as if he had been
mailed in glittering sheets of silver. A ditto suit of melancholy
bottle-green sufficed for Philip’s unambitious taste.

These with the venerable senior of the family had assembled in the great
saloon, when the Reverend Edward Wilson, leading our young hero by the
hand, presented him to his grandfather with the following address--I
have the honour, sir, to introduce my pupil to you, and am most happy in
assuring you, that I have already witnessed such encouraging instances
both of his application and of his talents, as far exceed the promise of
my most sanguine hopes. If my instructions can keep pace with the
rapidity of his comprehension, it will not be very long before he will
have exhausted all I shall wish to teach him as a reader of the
classics. His own naturally strong understanding, and the inborn virtues
of his heart, will leave me little else to do, save only to repress a
certain ebullition of courageous spirit, which, though it be a quality,
that ought to be found in every gentleman’s character, should not be
called forth upon every frivolous occasion.

The old man sighed, cast a tender look upon his grandson, kissed him on
each cheek, and turning aside to the preceptor, said in a whisper, I
will talk to him on this subject.

A dealer in minute descriptions would here find some employment about
the dress and person of our hero, as well as of his aunt Cecilia,
hitherto unnoticed; but as elegance and perfect neatness were all that
she aimed at, and her nephew imitated, simplicity, as I understand it,
is not liable to description, and it would be loss of labour to attempt
it.

The equipage of Sir Owen ap Owen was now discovered in approach. There
had been a sensible falling off in the accustomed intercourse between
the houses of De Lancaster and Owen since the accession of the Spanish
widow and her son to the family of the baronet. Some little sparring
upon points of county politics had occurred to threaten rather than to
effect an actual breach between them. This visit therefore was regarded
by the worthy host of the castle as a conciliatory advance on the part
of his old friend and neighbour, whom of course he welcomed with all
possible cordiality.

Sir Owen’s constitution was completely broken down; he walked with
difficulty through the hall, leaning on De Lancaster’s arm, who saw with
concern the change, that had been wrought in his once sturdy frame.
Philip not being disposed to quit his corner, Captain Henry Wilson
ushered in Mrs. David Owen, who having made her Spanish salutations to
the company, took her seat upon the sopha, and gave the captain to
understand that there was room for him to sit beside her. She made an
excuse for her son, that he was out with the hounds, and had not
returned, but would pay his compliments to Mr. De Lancaster in the
course of the afternoon: she turned a look upon her bottle-green lover,
which was not very expressive of complacency, and immediately played off
her best graces on the captain: she took notice of his uniform, and
complimented him by observing it was quite as brilliant as that of the
Spanish guards--If we, who wear it, are quite as brave, the captain
courteously replied, our finery will be well bestowed. She addressed
herself to Cecilia, and observed that Master John, as she called him,
was very much grown. He had taken his seat beside his godfather Sir
Owen, who, when he had recovered his breath, said to De Lancaster--We
are come, my good sir, to pay our compliments to you on this occasion,
and have brought Ap-Rees with us to give you a specimen of his art,
which you will understand, but I do not. Rachel, as you see, has set
herself out in all her finery to do grace to your festival, but you must
take a plain man in a plain coat, for I am too ill to thrust my crazy
carcase into a fresh doublet, and shall hardly shift my rigging till I
change it for a suit of sheep’s wool only.

De Lancaster shook his head, turned an eye of pity on his friend, but
made no answer.

Sir Owen had now taken his godson by the hand, and was asking him why he
did not go out with the hounds--I wait, John replied, till I can see
you in the field, mounted on your favourite horse Glendowr; then I shall
turn out with pleasure--Ah! my dear boy, cried Sir Owen, never, never
again in this life shall I find myself upon the back of Glendowr. I can
only look at him through the window, when he is led out to amuse me. He
is the best horse and the best hunter in England: Lamprey was his sire,
and Lamprey belonged to Sir William Morgan of Tredegar. I am torn to
pieces for Glendowr, but a sack of money would not buy him: nephew David
spells hard to borrow him, but I won’t lend him to David of all men
living, for he is cruel to his horses, and abuses the fine creature,
that carries him; but I will lend him to you, John, freely and
willingly, for you are merciful, and will use him well; nay, I could
find it in my heart to give him to you out and out.

Upon no account, John exclaimed, would I take him, whilst it can afford
you, my dear sir, a moment’s pleasure to look at him.

Well, well! that’s handsome, he replied. Wait the going of a few short
weeks, and you’ll find him in my will.

There is something more than meets the eye in this circumstance of the
horse, or we should not have inserted it.

The guests in the mean time were coming in, and at an early hour the
castle-bell rang out for dinner. At this instant the heir of the Owens
made his appearance in his hunting uniform, and booted. He apologised
for this by saying he had not quitted the saddle, that he might be in
time to pay his compliments to Mr. De Lancaster within the hour, that
was specified on his card. All this was very well, and Mr. David Owen
was most courteously welcomed by Mr. De Lancaster and the inmates of his
family. John made his bow, and Mr. Owen fell in with the company, who
were now summoned to the dinner room, and took his seat at table.

Hospitality without parade, and festivity without excess was the
character of an entertainment projected and conducted by the presiding
genius of Cecilia De Lancaster.

Mr. David Owen assumed a certain consequential style and carriage, which
strongly indicated, that he knew himself as the heir of his uncle’s
title and estate, and that he saw the hour at hand, which was to put him
in possession of both. A set of vulgar companions, who frequented his
uncle’s table, had blown him up with flattery, whilst they were sapping
the constitution of poor Sir Owen with their sottish debaucheries,
which, if Mrs. David Owen took no ostensible measures to encourage, she
certainly used no efforts to prevent: of her maternal authority she made
no use, nor indeed could any be made, for it was completely dispensed
with. Nature in the meanwhile had not done much for the young gentleman,
and education very little; yet he was not without talents of a certain
sort, and whenever opportunity offered for employing them, diffidence
never stood in his way. He had the cunning of a Jew, and the haughtiness
of a Spaniard: ridicule was his passion, and mimicry, particularly of
his uncle, what he most excelled in. He had black piercing eyes, an
aquiline nose and Moorish complexion, a high shrill voice, and when he
wrinkled up his features into a smile, it was the grin of malice and
derision.




CHAPTER VI.

_Occurrences at Kray Castle during the Assembly of the Minstrels._


When the repast was over, and the glass had cheerfully, yet temperately,
circulated, the doors of the great hall were thrown open: a scaffolding
containing seats for the company, and a stage for the performers had
been prepared, and the audience was full. Old De Lancaster, encircled by
his guests, made the central figure of the assembly, and his entrance
was hailed by a chorus of harps, joining in the popular air--_Of a
noble race was Shenkin_.

When this was past, the names of six selected minstrels were announced.
Each of these was of high celebrity in his art, and the respectability
of the audience called on them for their best exertions. When four of
this number had now acquitted themselves with great credit, and the
plaudits of the hearers seemed to have been pretty equally bestowed
amongst them, there remained only Robin Ap-Rees, the famous harper of
Penruth Abbey, and David Williams of Kray Castle as yet unheard. In
these celebrated performers there existed a high spirit of emulation,
and the opinions of the country were divided between them: Though rivals
in art, they were brothers in misfortune, for both were bereft of
sight--_Blind Thamyris and blind Mœonides_.

After a pause of some minutes, Ap-Rees presented himself to the
spectators, led, like Tiresias, by his young and blooming daughter, and
followed by his son, carrying his harp. The interesting group so touched
all hearts, and set all hands in motion, that the hall rung with their
plaudits. He was a tall thin man with stooping shoulders, bald head,
pale visage, of a pensive cast, and habited in a long black mantle of
thin stuff bound about with a rose-coloured sash of silk, richly fringed
with silver, and on his breast, appending to a ribbon of pale blue, hung
a splendid medal of honour.

Before he took the seat, that was provided for him, he stopped and made
a profound obeisance to the company: his daughter in the meantime,
modest, timid and unprepared for such a scene, not venturing to
encounter the eyes of the spectators, when she had placed her father in
his seat, no longer able to struggle with her sensibility, sunk into his
arms, trembling and on the point to faint: her brother stood aghast and
helpless: the ladies manifested their alarm by screams, and the men were
rising from their seats, when our hero, whose only monitor was his
heart, leapt on the stage and sprung to her relief: she revived, and he
gallantly conducted her to a seat, where she was no longer exposed to
the observation of the company who cheered him with a loud applause.

Silence being restored, Ap-Rees began to tune his harp. He paused, as if
waiting for the inspiration of his muse; his bosom yet laboured with the
recent agitation of his spirits, when at length he threw his hand over
the strings, and began the symphony. His song was the tale of ancient
days: he took for his theme the religious legend of the famous knight
Sir Owen, one of the ancestors of his present patron. The legend is
detailed at length by Matthew Paris in his history, page 86, edited by
Doctor Watts in the year 1640, and few can be found better calculated to
call forth all the powers of poetry and music: The date is that of the
reign of King Stephen, and in the wars of that period Sir Owen had very
valorously distinguished himself. When Ap-Rees described his hero
entering the tremendous cave amidst the wailings of the tormented, and
beset by the infernal spirits, who assailed his constancy by every
horrible device their malice could suggest, so striking were the
effects, so contrasted the transitions of his harmony, that he seemed
almost to realize those fearful yellings, groanings and thunderings
recorded in the story. When he advanced to that period, where the
fortitude of the knight baffles all the efforts of the dæmons, the
movement, which had before been turbulent, irregular and excursive,
became solemn, flowing and majestic; but when in conclusion Sir Owen,
triumphant over his assailants, puts them to general rout, and the
gloomy cave in an instant is converted into a bright and blooming
paradise, the minstrel with such art adapted his melody to the scene
described, and so tranquillizing was the sweetness of his strain, that
at the close he left his hearers still impressed with those delightful
sensations, which Milton describes Adam to have felt, whilst the voice
of the communicative angel was yet dwelling on his ear.

At length De Lancaster rose up, and addressing himself to the minstrel,
testified his high admiration of the excellent performance he had
witnessed, observing that it had been particularly gratifying to him to
listen to a poem, founded on the magnanimous behaviour of a truly
Christian knight, who was enrolled amongst the many heroes, which the
ancient and illustrious house of his friend and countryman Sir Owen ap
Owen might justly boast of.

This speech was followed by a thundering applause, the exulting minstrel
made his valedictory obeisance, and withdrew.

Sir Owen in the meantime whispered his friend De Lancaster, that he had
never read the story, but he was told it was put down in a book and of
course he conceived it must be all true.

David Williams now remained to ascend the stage and close the
entertainment. He was ushered in, habited in a loose vest or mantle of
white cloth with open sleeves, which he had tucked up, leaving his arms
bare: it was bound about his waist with a broad belt of orange-tawney
silk, and upon his breast he wore a medal, on which the device of the
winged harp was conspicuously displayed: a fillet of the same colour
with his belt confined his white locks, and when he had arranged himself
in his seat and begun to touch his harp, all was silence and attentive
expectation.

At length, rolling his sightless eyeballs in a kind of poetic phrensy,
he began his song from Noah: he sung the destructive visitation of the
general deluge: he chanted the praises of King Samothes, and the
splendor of his court; he then took a martial strain, and, smiting his
harp with all the fire of an enthusiast, sung the triumphs of the giant
son of Neptune, who entailed the trident of his father on his new-named
Albion to all posterity. The animating subject seized the passions of
the hearers, and the applause was loud and clamourous.

When this subsided, the minstrel chose a melancholy theme; his head
drooped upon his harp, and his fingers moved languidly over the strings,
whilst in a slow and mournful strain he chanted the sad fate of Bladud--

    “Fallen from his towring flight,
    “And weltring in his blood.--”

During the movement all were silent, when at once the harp was heard to
break forth into a melody of the most gay and joyous character, inviting
all present to festivity and good fellowship, and invoking blessings on
the hospitable and time-honoured house of De Lancaster.

The harp now ceased, and the several minstrels, as well those, who had
attended and were unheard, as those, who had performed, being assembled
on the platform, the venerable patron and projector of the entertainment
stood up in his place, and addressed himself to speak as follows--

Gentlemen, who have so highly gratified us with your excellent
performances, and you also, who, if time had permitted, would have
increased that gratification; masters and professors of that science,
which is at once so dignified and so delightful, I offer you on the
part of all here present the tribute of our unanimous acknowledgments,
and our unqualified approbation and applause. We beg you will be pleased
to share our praises amongst you; we do not presume to apportion them
according to your respective merits. And now friends, neighbours and
countrymen, who have done me the honour to accept any invitation to this
our domestic eistedfodd, you have heard the lay of our minstrel David
Williams, and although, for brevity’s sake, he took it up from the
deluge only, yet, if you do not already know, you ought now to be
informed, that this unconquered soil whereon we dwell, was in times
antecedent to that visitation as fully peopled, and arts and sciences
were as happily cultivated here as within any spot upon the habitable
globe. If therefore in the recitation of the lay, which I allude to,
mention of that early time was omitted to be made, it was not because
records are wanting of sufficient authenticity to illuminate the
subject, forasmuch as not a few of those, who lived before the flood,
have spoken for themselves, and their words and works have descended to
us through the lapse of ages. Witness those treatises upon natural
magic, which Ham the son of Noah, when in the ark with his father,
possessed himself of, and having bequeathed them to his son Misraim,
were afterwards made public to the great edification of the repeopled
world. Nay, gentlemen, let me assure you, there are those, who trace the
origin of the Chrysopeia, or art of making gold, even up to Adam
himself, who in a tract of his own composing (after the fall we will
suppose) expounds that curious process.

I lay this before you, friends and countrymen, knowing that there are
few amongst you, who do not trace your pedigrees up to the ante-diluvian
ages, and I rest what I have said upon sound authorities that you, being
true and ancient Britons, may have wherewithal to defend your
derivations from your father Adam, if any there may be, obstinate and
absurd enough to dispute them.

I shall now trespass on your time no longer, than whilst I express my
hope that you, my gallant countrymen, who have held the tenure of this
soil from ages so remote, will persevere to defend it through ages yet
to come from all invaders foreign and domestic.




CHAPTER VII.

_Harmony of Sounds does not always ensure Harmony of Souls._


Whilst these performances were going on, Mr. David Owen, sullen and
unsocial, had planted himself on a bench as far apart from the principal
gentry as he could, and obstinately resisted all solicitations to take a
seat more suitable to his rank, and more respectful to the company there
assembled. Mr. De Lancaster however, as a mark of his attention, had
desired his son Philip to place himself by his side, and take care that
nothing was omitted, that could add to his entertainment or
accommodation. Nothing could be more acceptable to Philip than a
commission of this sort, which consigned him to a post, where he might
sit unseeing and unseen, and happily enjoy a complete vacation from
thought, whilst his sulky neighbour, wearied with his morning’s chace,
and little interested by what was going forward, fell asleep.

The bustle however, which Nancy Ap Rees had occasioned when she led her
father on the stage, caused the drowsy gentleman to open his eyes just
as our John De Lancaster was sallying to her assistance--That youngster
of yours, said David, methinks is very officious. I am weary of this
mummery. Can’t we slip aside, and repose ourselves in a quiet room till
this tiresome business is all over? I believe you find as little
amusement in it as I do.

I find none at all, Philip replied, and rising up, cried, now is the
moment, follow me.

When the assembly had broken up, and the gentry were filing off to the
collation, that was set out for them in the great parlour, Mr. David
Owen and his umbra in the bottle green were missing. It was suspected
they had retired to Philip’s private room, and our hero John was
dispatched to find them. This discovery was soon made, and his message
as soon delivered. Philip set out upon the summons, when young Owen,
instead of following him out of the room, which he seemed prepared to
do, shut the door, and turning to John, who was civilly attending upon
him, said to him in his ironical and sneering way--Upon my word, young
gentleman, you have made a very capital display of your agility before
the company in jumping on the stage, and shewing off your gallantry
towards a young wench, who is in the high situation of daughter to our
old blind harper, and a domestic in our family.

Sir, replied the youth, I considered her situation in no other light
than as she seemed to want assistance, and in tendering that, I trust I
have not offended Mr. David Owen.

Oh, by no means, replied the other in the same taunting tone; you
afforded me an opportunity of admiring you in the amiable attitude of
succouring a distressed and fainting damsel--besides, give me leave to
observe, that such a heavy load of music without a little dancing
between whiles would have been absolutely insupportable, and I felt
myself unspeakably obliged to you for the relief, which your elegant
performance so seasonably afforded; and if my respect for the ladies
present had not bound me to silence, I should have requested you to
have repeated that delightful rigadoon with Miss Nancy Ap Rees for my
particular entertainment.

There are no ladies here present, cried the gallant youth, stepping up
to him; so, if you are in the same humour still, your respect need not
stop you: but let me remind you, Mr. Owen, that it is no mark of courage
to insult me under the sanction of a roof, where the laws of hospitality
forbid me to resent it. Take your opportunity of playing off your
spiteful jests upon me in any other place, and you shall find me, though
your inferior in the art of ridicule, at least your equal in the spirit
of a gentleman. I know you can throw dirt and bespatter very
ingeniously, and enjoy the mischief as a joke, without remorse for the
pain and injury it inflicts.

At this moment Edward Wilson entered the room, and from the last words,
which he had heard, and the angry countenance of his pupil, guessing
what had passed--John De Lancaster, he cried, recollect yourself!

Aye, sir, resumed the demy-Spaniard, now more pale and sallow with his
rage, teach your schoolboy better manners, and warn him how he carries
himself so unbecomingly towards one, who is every way his superior.

Tell me first, said Wilson, in what my pupil has offended you; and as
you are his superior in age, avail yourself of that advantage by stating
your dispute calmly and dispassionately, and let me fairly judge between
you.

No, sir, replied the haughty youth, I shall state nothing, nor let any
man be judge over me; least of all a gentleman in your predicament, Mr.
Wilson, whose judgment I can pretty well guess at. Let your angry boy
make up his story as he likes, and you may believe it, or not, as you
like. I care not. Into this house I will never enter more with my good
will.

In that respect, said Wilson, you must do as you see fit; but command
yourself at present, and that you may not disturb the harmony of the
night, let me recommend it to you to join the company.

And if I do, sir, resumed the insolent, give me leave to tell you that
wherever and whenever I sit down at table with any one, that bears the
name of De Lancaster, I shall consider myself as in company with my
inferior.

Hold! You forget yourself, cried the reverend Mr. Wilson; you are much
too lofty; and if you do not speedily correct that pride yourself,
somebody will be found to do it for you.

Go, go! said Owen, don’t tutor me, tutor your schoolboy, and let him
think himself well off, that he has escaped chastisement.

Chastisement! exclaimed John, and put himself before the door; you dare
as well eat fire, as repeat that to me in another place.

As John was saying this, David Owen, who was making for the door, put
him aside, rather roughly, with his hand, and walked out of the room in
that kind of strutting style, which a braggart finds it convenient to
assume on his departure, when he feels the time is come, that
counterfeited courage will no longer serve his purpose.

Was not that a blow, cried John, eagerly arresting Wilson, as he was
about to follow? Has not that Jew-born miscreant given me a blow?

What ails you? Are you mad? It was no blow.

It makes my flesh burn where his hand was on me. Indeed, indeed! I feel
it as a blow. I’m sure he struck me. Why should you deny it? I thought
you had been my friend.

I am your friend, said Wilson, looking him stedfastly in the face, and
if you do not consider me as such because I did not suffer you to
disgrace the hospitality of your grandfather by a fray with one of his
guests, you do not judge of me with truth and candour, but in the heat
of passion and resentment.

Disarmed, and brought to instant recollection by this temperate
remonstrance, the brave youth cried out--I’m wrong, I’m wrong! I pray
you to forgive me. You are my friend, and I depend upon you: but call it
what you will--a push, a touch--the spite and malice of the action gives
it the cast and character of a blow; and to put up with a blow from
David Owen, what could there be in life so disgraceful, what in death so
dreadful as that?

John, John, said Wilson gravely and authoritatively, I must remind you
in what charge I stand towards you, and by what duty you are bound to
me: I tell you once again, it was no blow. You put yourself between him
and the door; he could not pass you otherwise than he did. Come, come,
you must reform this angry spirit; it savours of revenge; and to carry
such an inmate in your bosom, would be neither for your reputation, nor
repose. There is however one species of revenge, in which I will assist
you, I mean the revenge of virtue, the triumph of a good and noble
character over an ignoble and an evil one: that victory if you can
obtain (and it shall be my study to point out the road to it) you will
then establish a fair title to that superiority over David Owen, which
he now vainly arrogates over you. Come then, my dear John, let us
henceforward set about that honourable task in earnest, and in the mean
time treat his insolence only with contempt.




CHAPTER VIII.

_Our Hero goes to Glen-Morgan, and pays a Visit to Mrs. Jennings at
Denbigh._


Lawyer Davis (universally so called) was an active honourable little
fellow in great request, and would ride further for a few shillings in
the prosecution of his business, than some physicians will for as many
pounds. He was a light weight, was always well-mounted, and travelled by
the compass with extraordinary expedition. In the early morning of the
day, immediately following the festival at Kray Castle, he called upon
our hero John with an invitation from his grandfather at Glen-Morgan to
come over to him upon particular business, and Davis did not disguise
from him that it was for the purpose of communicating to him the
disposal of his effects by will.

To a summons so important there was neither prohibition nor delay. John
however in a short interview with his mother suggested to her the
opportunity, that now offered for presenting to Amelia the miniature of
her father, with which he was entrusted. Mrs. De Lancaster had no
objection to his making an excursion to Denbigh, and allowed him to use
her name for his introduction to Miss Jones, but the proposal of writing
to Mrs. Jennings had been laid aside. Lawyer Davis was to go with him,
and John under such a swift-sailing convoy soon found himself safe
moored by the side of his grandfather.

John, said the good old man, I have been putting down a few items in
the only work of mine, that will ever descend to posterity, and as you
have a concern in the purport of it, I think it is but right you should
know what it is. In this paper, which is my last will and testament, and
which friend Davis has translated out of English into law, I have
bequeathed my estates real and personal to your mother independantly of
her husband for her life, and after her decease to you and your heirs,
executors and assigns, for ever. So God bless you with it! I for one
shan’t hold it from you long. However take notice, I have not forgotten
certain friends and dependants, who will have claims upon you; and as I
have not been notoriously uncharitable in my life, I have not quite
overlooked that duty at my death. I shall not turn out rich in money,
for the labouring poor have been so confoundedly pinched, that they
would not let me gratify the rascally passion, which I naturally had to
be a miser. There is Dame Jennings will come upon you for an annuity,
and that little witch Amelia Jones is down in black and white for
another. I could not help it. They were both too good, and one of them
too pretty, too innocent, and too helpless to be left to the wide world;
I could not go out of it in peace, and leave them to starve in poverty:
you must think, John, that would not do; would it? No, no; I was forced
to take care of them for the sake of an easy conscience, or in other
words (do you see) for my own sake; else I should not have done it for
the mere pleasure of giving away; for I have no pleasure in it. As a
proof of that, look you, here is a hundred guineas in a canvas purse; I
took from the greasy pocket of a drover for twenty head of scabby
cattle, that were neither use nor ornament to me. I cheated the poor
fellow, or rather I should say, let him cheat himself; for I took what
he offered. Now here’s a case in point, if you don’t take and rid me of
it, it will lie upon my conscience, and what with that and the gout
together, I shall get no sleep.

You know, my dear generous grandfather, said John, I don’t want money.

Perhaps not; but I want sleep, replied the grandfather; therefore take
it, if you love me, and dispose of it as you like. John made no further
opposition, but received the present.

It so chanced that in the evening a certain Jew, Israel Lyons by name,
who was in the practice of travelling about the country at stated
periods with his portable stock in trade, came to the house. He had the
character of a fair-dealing man, and was well known to the principal
families in those parts. Israel either bought or sold, and was a trader
in all respects conformable to the occasions of those, to whom he
resorted. Old Morgan having retired to his chamber, John, according to
custom, had stepped aside to pay a kind visit to Mrs. Richards and the
old butler, whilst Israel was descanting upon the excellence of a pair
of spectacles, which the good lady was cheapening; these were soon
purchased and paid for without any cheapening at all, and in the mean
time our hero’s eyes were caught by the attraction of a rich and elegant
gold chain of curious workmanship, which Israel displayed with address
and eloquence, at least proportioned to its merit. It instantly
occurred to John that this brilliant chain would admirably become the
beautiful neck of Amelia, and be a fit and apposite appendage to the
miniature picture of her father, which he was about to present to her. A
speedy transfer of the aforesaid chain was accordingly made by Mr.
Israel Lyons, who had no kind of difficulty in parting from it for value
received in ready cash upon terms of his own proposing; and thus it came
to pass, that the present, which John hesitated to receive, was, as it
now turned out, most opportunely bestowed.

The next morning brought our young De Lancaster to the door of Mrs.
Jennings; he was admitted to that lady, but Amelia was not present. When
he had communicated the object of his visit, and signified that he
waited on Miss Jones with the entire approbation, and in fact by the
immediate desire of his mother, Mrs. Jennings paused, and after a few
moments recollection, said--I should very much wish, Mr. De Lancaster,
that Amelia Jones, agitated as I am sure she will be upon the sight of
this most interesting present, might with your permission be allowed to
receive it in the first instance through my hands; that so she may have
time to recollect herself, before she undertakes to pay her
acknowledgments to Mrs. De Lancaster through you, and to you in person;
and I hope, sir, you will believe that I can have no other inducement
for proposing this to you, except that of my consideration for the
feelings of the young and sensitive creature, who is under my immediate
charge.

To this appeal our hero instantly, replied--As I promised my mother
that I would deliver this token of her affection into Miss Jones’s
hands, I confess I wished to have fulfilled my promise; but your
authority supersedes those wishes on my part, and with all possible
respect for your superior judgment, I beg you will transmit this pacquet
to Miss Jones in the way you think best: I am only the bearer of it, and
shall intrude no further--Having risen from his seat whilst he was
uttering these words, he had no sooner made an end of speaking, than he
bolted out of the room with a rapidity, that precluded all reply--Never
will I enter those doors again, he exclaimed as he stepped into the
street, whilst that dragon is within them.--

We make no comment on this hasty proceeding of our disappointed hero:
some of our readers perhaps will find a plea for it; we offer none. The
good lady whose caution had given cause for it, (if any cause there
was) had by the sudden departure of her visitor been precluded from
making any of those efforts for detaining him, which politeness might
else have dictated. He had passed her windows before she had
sufficiently recovered her surprise to attempt at explanation, and she
had now to reflect how far it was, or was not, incumbent upon her to
relate the incident with all its circumstances to Amelia. In her sense
of the responsible situation, in which she stood towards the families of
De Lancaster and Morgan, she conceived it highly behoved her to be
extremely careful how she gave them any grounds to accuse her of
favouring interviews, that in course of time might lead to an
attachment, which she had reason to apprehend might involve her in much
trouble, if considered by those families as originating in her house.

When she had weighed these circumstances in her mind, she found so many
reasons, that justified her reserve towards young De Lancaster, that she
no longer regretted the interruption she had given to a second
interview, which would probably have excited some sensations, and drawn
out some expressions on the part of Amelia, which she by no means was
disposed to encourage. She now took up the pacquet, and entering the
room, where Amelia, unconscious of what had been passing, was employed
upon her studies--My dear child, she said, I have a present for you from
Mrs. Philip De Lancaster, which I am sure you will very highly value,
being a miniature portrait of your father, which that lady has long had
in her possession, and now kindly bestows it upon you--Bless me,
exclaimed Amelia, how very kind that is in Mrs. De Lancaster! What a
good and generous lady she must be. In the meantime she eagerly
proceeded to open the pacquet, which inclosed two shagreen cases, and
instantly taking that, which evidently contained the miniature of her
father, rapturously exclaimed--Oh, what an exquisite, what an admirable
resemblance; how lovely, how divine is the expression of this
countenance! I can look on this with more delight than I can on the
portrait below stairs; for here I behold him happy and in health; there
he appears so melancholy and dejected, that I can hardly ever look upon
it without tears--But what in the name of wonder is this, said she,
opening the case, in which the gold chain was contained? Bless me! can
this fine thing be intended for me? Did Mrs. De Lancaster give me this
also?

I suppose so, said Mrs. Jennings: at least I know nothing to the
contrary.

But who brought it? demanded Amelia; and thus interrogated, Mrs.
Jennings was constrained to answer, that it was brought and delivered to
her by young De Lancaster himself.

Oh then I am sure this chain at least is his present, said the
enraptured girl, (her face flushing, and her eyes glistening with joy)
why didn’t you call me down instantly to pay my thanks to him? Come,
madam! why do we keep him waiting?

Hold, my dear. The gentleman is not waiting: he is gone.

Gone! exclaimed Amelia! you astonish me; you alarm me. Is it possible
Mr. De Lancaster could bring me these fine presents, these inestimable
presents, and go away without seeing me? Ah dear madam, tell me at once
without disguise where is he gone; why is he gone?

Have patience, my dear child, and you shall hear--It was by no means my
wish that he should go without your seeing him, and paying him your
acknowledgments so justly due; but as I did not know to what degree you
might be affected by the sight of your father’s picture, I thought it on
all accounts adviseable to desire Mr. De Lancaster would allow me to be
the bearer of the pacquet to you; for which I assured him I had no other
motive but consideration and regard for your repose; upon which he gave
me the pacquet, expressed himself disappointed, and before I could
answer, left the house.

In anger--

I suspect it.

Ah madam, madam, where then is my repose, which you so cautiously
consulted? Gone for ever. I might have been the happiest of human
beings, I am now the most miserable. Much as I adore the memory of my
father, infinitely as I prize this relique, which presents me with his
image, and dear to me as this token of Mr. De Lancaster’s favour would
have been, yet as he wished to give it to me, and that small, that
trifling gratification was denied to him, never will I wear it, touch
it, look upon it more, till I receive it from his hands, and am assured
of his forgiveness.

Having said this, she burst into tears, and what Mrs. Jennings suggested
for her consolation would not be very interesting to relate.




CHAPTER IX.

_A Hasty Retreat. Meditations by the Way._


When a hasty youth is mounted on a hasty horse, who can foresee where
the spur of passion will transport him? The patience of an ass, or the
obstinacy of a mule might either weary out his anger, or so divert it,
as to give him some chance for recollection; but John and his steed were
in the same humour for a start at score, and it seemed equally
indifferent to both which way they bent their course, so they did but
agree to outrun discretion. They soon left Denbigh behind them, and as
Glen Morgan did not just then occur to the rider, and old Ben could not
come up within earshot to remind him of it, where they might have gone
is mere matter of conjecture, but certainly not to Kray Castle, had not
that inextinguishable spark of humanity, which John cherished in his
bosom, given him a memento, that a generous animal ought not to suffer
merely because a hot-headed rider had got astride upon his back.

The impulse of pity, that now struck upon the heart of John, was
instantaneous. He stopped his horse, dismounted, relieved him by
slackening the stricture of his girths, turned his nostrils to the wind,
wiped the sweat from his face and ears, caressed him and in his heart
asked pardon for the unreasonable fatigue he had exposed him to. Whilst
this was passing Ben came panting up: what he had in mind to say is lost
to the world, forasmuch as being rather pursey, Ben had not breath to
utter it; besides which, the offender having now recollected himself,
had prevented his curiosity at the same time that he softened his
remonstrance, by apologising for his excursion, confessing that he had
forgotten himself, and did not know why he came there, nor where he was.

’Tis very well then that I can tell you whereabouts you are, Ben
replied.

Well! and where am I? John demanded.

Out of your road, said Ben, quite and clean; that’s where you are, and
so I would have told you in good time, hadn’t you gallopped on at such a
pelting rate, that I couldn’t get up to you: And now may I ask without
offence where it is your pleasure to go next?

Home, to the Castle--was the answer.

Then we must not travel quite so fast if you please, said Ben; for the
road is somewhat difficult to hit off, and not over smooth besides.

Lead the way! John replied: go your own pace, and I’ll follow--This
point being adjusted, conversation ceased, and our young hero began to
meditate as follows--

That I have cause to feel and resent the treatment I have received is an
opinion that I still persist in, but I am conscious of the folly I have
been guilty of in suffering myself to be hurried into such ridiculous
excesses, as I have now been giving way to. Of this I am most heartily
ashamed; but after being denied access to Amelia, when coming by my
mother’s authority, and bringing her present in my hand as my
introduction, I hold myself justified in resolving never more to enter
Mrs. Jennings’s doors, nor subject myself to be considered by that
precise repulsive lady as an unwelcome and obnoxious visitor. If there
was no collusion between the governess and her charge, (and I confess
there does not appear to have been any such) I certainly have no reason
to be offended with Amelia, who perhaps may have felt some portion of
that disappointment, which fell so heavily upon me. All that I have
promised and solemnly pledged myself to do in her behalf, I will
faithfully fulfil; but I will not allow Mrs. Jennings to misinterpret my
attentions and suspect that I am governed by any motives with regard to
the lovely and engaging orphan under her care, which are not simply
directed to her service, and strictly consistent with the purest honour:
She shall not therefore be alarmed in future by any assiduities on my
part, which it shall be possible for her to misconstrue and suspect.
Heaven knows I have need enough of instruction, and to my studies under
the direction of my excellent preceptor I will henceforward so totally
devote myself, that if there was any early preference forming at my
heart, which time and opportunity might have ripened into positive
attachment, it is now the moment for me to suppress it, and by
application to acquirements, in which I am so glaringly deficient, give
them all my thoughts, and let no wandering wishes turn them from the
tract, they ought to follow and persist in.

Whilst our young heart-wounded hero was arguing himself into this wise
resolution, and proposing to derive profit from disappointment, he came
within sight of a cottage, whose lonely and desolate situation seemed
ill accordant with the neatness and studied comfort of every thing
about it. Two women were sitting at their needle-work in the little
garden in the front of it, and he was already near enough to distinguish
the features of the youngest before she had started from her seat, and
ran into the house. He was so struck with the resemblance, that she bore
to the daughter of Sir Owen’s minstrel, blind Ap-Rees, of whom we have
made former mention, that he stopped, and put that question to the
elderly dame, who kept her seat: the dame at first did not think fit to
answer, but upon the question being respectfully urged a second
time--Whether that young person was, or was not, Nancy Ap-Rees, she
briefly replied--That young person is my daughter, and my name is not
Ap-Rees.

Then I am mistaken, said John, and rode on.

Satisfied with this answer, which at the present time made but a slight
impression on his thoughts, he proceeded homewards, following his guide
step by step through all the sinuosities of a craggy road, ruminating
upon what had passed at Denbigh, at some times accusing, and at others
acquitting himself for his conduct upon that occasion. He formed a wild
and fanciful conception of those brilliant lights, that science would in
time unfold; but whilst he was enjoying this platonic vision, the
sylph-like image of Amelia would recur to his imagination in the
captivating attitude of standing at his elbow, as once she had been
seen, when, taken by surprise, he caught her in his arms, and
rapturously pressed her to his heart. Thus advancing onwards, though
not conscious of progression, he was at length recalled to recollection
by the sight of Kray Castle, and his reverie dispersed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The awful character of the time, in which we now live, calls upon every
writer to be cautious how he appeals to the passions of mankind. The
novelist, who is professedly a writer of this description, has no
arbitrary power, independant of morality, over the characters he
exhibits merely because they are fictions of his own inventing: he has
duties, which he is bound to observe, and cannot violate without
offence.

Under this impression, I endeavour to conduct my fable, studious to make
that amiable, which I strive to make attractive; and although, in
obedience to nature, I must mingle shade with light, I flatter myself
that vice of my devising will have no allurements to attach the unwary,
nor virtue be pourtrayed with those romantic attributes, which, bearing
no similitude to real life, leave no impression on the reader’s mind,
nor can be turned to any moral use.

                        END OF THE FIRST BOOK.




                           BOOK THE SECOND.




CHAPTER I.

_Sir Owen ap Owen on his Death-Bed takes leave of Mr. De Lancaster._


There was an apartment in one of the turrets of Kray Castle, which
commanded a fine view of the park and country, bounded by the sea: here
it was that young De Lancaster commenced a course of application to his
studies under the instruction of his excellent preceptor, to which he
devoted himself with so determined a passion for improvement, that it
was not long before he had made a progress in the learned languages,
that would have qualified him to pass muster with most young scholars of
his standing.

Nature had endowed him with a strong and retentive memory, and parts
rather solid than brilliant: he had great industry, a ready apprehension
and a mind turned to enquiry. Few temptations were now sufficiently
alluring to detach him from his books; so grateful to him were the
lectures of his instructor, and so delectable the acquisition of
knowledge, that he sought no pleasures, and seemed to regret all
avocations. His volatility of spirit had now in a great degree subsided;
he became cautious in the company of his seniors, and more disposed to
listen than to talk. The neighbours did not think him mended by his
studies, and the servants, who had been the companions of his puerile
sports, pronounced that he was spoilt.

An unatoned insult still rankled at his heart, and he shunned the sight
of David Owen, not because he feared him, but because he doubted his
own self-command upon the meeting. That arrogant young man had now taken
a decided character; was a loud talker and a bold assertor, and, being
under no restraint, gave himself all the latitude, which the actual
possession of what he was only presumptive heir to, could have
emboldened him to assume.

As for Sir Owen, he was now in the last stage of a decline, never
stirred from his chamber, and was considered by all about him as a man,
who had not many days to live. In this extremity he dispatched a
messenger to Kray Castle to request an interview with his old friend De
Lancaster, who immediately put himself in order to obey the summons. As
soon as his arrival was announced, Sir Owen dismissed his attendants,
and received his worthy visitor alone in his chamber. After the
customary enquiries had passed, the baronet delivered himself as
follows--

I have asked this favour of you, my good friend and neighbour, because I
perceive myself going out of the world, and, having great esteem and
respect for you, I would willingly bid you farewell before I am gone. I
have thought very little about death till it has come upon me as it were
at once; all I know of the matter is that we must all die, and so, you
see, I must take my turn, as others have done before, and every one must
do after me. If it had been my good fortune to have made myself
acceptable to your amiable daughter, I might have lived to enjoy, as you
do now, a healthy old age; but when a man has neither wife nor family
nor friend at hand to jog his memory upon occasion, he will be apt to
forget himself at times, and by going too fast come the sooner to his
journey’s end. That has been my case, friend De Lancaster, and how could
it be otherwise. I have none of those resources that you have; if my
house was full of books, they would be of no use to me; I should not
read one of them; I never had a turn that way. Time was I took delight
in hunting my own hounds; that, you know, is a rational and
gentlemanlike amusement, but when I could no longer follow it up, you
must think, I was fain to fall upon other means for making away with my
time: every man must do that; and what is so natural as to fly to the
pleasure of the table, when we can no longer enjoy the sports of the
field? So long as I could do both, and take them in their turns, all
things went well with me. If a country gentleman like me takes a cup too
much over night, he rides it off the next morning, and there’s an end of
it; but when he is reduced to the helpless situation, in which you now
see me, what is to be done? Life becomes a burden, and the sooner we are
quit of it, the better.

In truth, my good friend, said De Lancaster, I cannot wonder, if a life,
that furnishes no intellectual enjoyments, becomes burdensome: and since
it must be resigned when the disposer of our fate sees fit, it is happy
for us, when called upon to quit this world, if we find upon reflection
that the pleasures of it are not worthy of our regret.

I have had no pleasure in it, replied the dying man, since these people
came out of Spain to molest me. Had your daughter heard reason, when I
first proposed to her, I might have had a son and heir of my own,
British born, and, had that been the case, this mongrel of my brother’s
fathering, half Jew and half Spaniard, might have been a pedlar, and
hawked buckles and buttons about the country to his dying day, for what
I had cared: But that is over, and, except the few personals I have
willed away to huntsman and other of my friends, together with a
keep-sake to your daughter, and my favourite horse Glendowr to my
godson, all the real property I am possessed of must go to David by
entail, and a despicable David he will be, take my word for it.--

He would have said more, and struggled hard for speech, but his efforts
had already exhausted him, and he sunk back in his chair. Robert de
Lancaster rung the bell; the attendants came upon the summons: The good
man cast a pitying look for the last time upon his dying friend and
departed.




CHAPTER II.

_Sir Owen ap Owen Dies._


The next day Sir Owen died, and upon the opening of his will there was
found a bequest to Cecilia De Lancaster of a valuable brilliant diamond,
which he used to display upon his finger on certain days of ceremony,
and a remembrance to his godson John of his favourite hunter Owen
Glendowr. After a proper interval, during which the interment took
place, upon enquiry being made for these tokens, answer was given that
no diamond ring, as described in the will, could be found, and as for
the horse, they might take him away when they would; Sir David Owen saw
no reason why he should find stable room for him, and had ordered him to
be turned out upon the heath.

Galled by this insolent message, our hero with young Williams and two or
three domestics of the castle set out upon the search, and having
traversed the waste for a considerable time, at length discovered the
poor animal, laying in an obscure dell, hamstrung and dead.

When young De Lancaster cast his eyes upon the carcase of this fine
animal, and saw the wounds, that had been inflicted on him, it was with
the utmost difficulty he could command himself so far as to abstain from
any animadversions, that might indicate to the people with him, that his
suspicions pointed at Sir David Owen. He caused them to collect and
pile a heap of stones to mark the spot. He sate upon his horse in
melancholy silence, whilst this work was going on, and having imposed
like forbearance on his party, and completed what he was about, he bade
them follow him, and took his course to the castle.

Whilst this was going on consultation was held at the castle with the
family lawyer upon the circumstance of the diamond ring. In the
discussion of this delicate question the man of law and the man of
learning did not quite agree upon the means to be pursued; but as Davis,
although a pertinacious lawyer, had generally more resources at his
command than he chose all at once to call out, a compromise was made for
time, and the deliberation brought no other point to a conclusion,
except that it was agreed upon to deliberate further on some future
occasion.

John now arrived and in his grandfather’s hearing simply related his
adventure in search of the horse. Mr. De Lancaster was much less
reserved upon this subject than he had been on that of the ring. He even
declared that the wretch, who had been guilty of so barbarous and
malevolent an action was not fit to live: he would give twice the value
of the animal to discover the perpetrator, and Davis immediately
proposed to issue hand bills, offering a liberal reward for that
discovery. To this measure the old gentleman in the warmth of his
resentment gave no opposition, and one hundred pounds was determined
upon as the premium for information.

As soon as our young hero found himself alone with his friend and tutor
Wilson, he avowed the most unreserved suspicion of Sir David Owen--Could
there be any doubt, he demanded, if the wretch, who would not give the
horse the shelter of his stable, could have been any other than the
contriver, if not the actual perpetrator, of the cruelty, that had been
practised upon him? was there any name too bad for such a spiteful
rascal; he would post him upon every whipping post and stocks, in every
ale-house, barber’s shop and blacksmith’s shed throughout the county: he
would set a hundred men to work, and erect a pyramid of stones upon the
horse’s grave, that should perpetuate his infamy to ages.

Heyday, exclaimed Wilson; you are very fertile in devising methods of
revenge, and seem to forget, that you have neither yet brought
conviction to the criminal, or, if you had, that the law will put the
power of punishment into your hands; can you not recollect how much more
noble it is, how much more becoming of a christian and a gentleman, to
forgive than to revenge a wrong? I must wonder where you found that
bitterness of spirit, that would prompt you to entail a never ending
animosity upon your respective families. Can you suppose your
grandfather, your aunt or your parents could be reconciled to such a
proceeding? Certainly not. I am persuaded therefore you will dismiss all
meditations of so revengeful a nature, and wait the event of the
measures, which Davis has in hand for discovering the offender, and in
the meantime, recollect that if you cannot absolutely avoid entertaining
a suspicion, you can at least abstain from publishing it.

I have abstained, he replied, except towards you to whom I open all my
heart; but as I am persuaded that the perpetrator of this scandalous
action, if ever he is traced to conviction, will be found in the person
of him, whom I suspect, before that happens I wish you would contrive to
take or send me out of the way; for unless I were to imprison myself in
the castle, I might chance to cross upon that unworthy gentleman in my
excursions, and indeed, my good sir, I am far from sure, that I should
be capable of that self command and forbearance, which you recommend to
me.

It is to be presumed the substance of this conversation was reported at
head quarters, for the next morning John was summoned before his
grandfather and his aunt in the library, when the former of these
addressed him in the following terms.

John De Lancaster and my grandson, attend to what I am about to say to
you--I would have you to understand and remember that revenge is not
amongst the attributes of a hero, or the virtues of a christian. It
behoves me therefore to caution you against it: I hold it as my
indispensible duty to apprise you of what is expected from a gentleman
of your pure and unpolluted descent through successive generations from
times of the remotest antiquity to the present moment, in which you are
standing before me, the last and only hope, whereon I rest my fortune
and my name. You conceive yourself injured and affronted by a rash and
inconsiderate young man, your senior by some few years, who now inherits
the title and estate of my late friend and neighbour Sir Owen ap Owen:
upon this suspicion, for it amounts to nothing more, you meditate
revenge. Are you quite convinced you can with honour own yourself
affronted by him? I will not speak degradingly of any person’s family,
whether it be Spanish, or whether it be Jewish; but to one, or to the
other, of these we must resort for the pedigree of Sir David’s mother. I
draw no inference from this; I leave it with you for your consideration.
Recollect yourself however, my dear child; compute your age, your
strength, and, if there were no other bar to your resentment, how are
you to execute it? Puerile resentment--What is that? A boyish scuffle it
may be; an interchange perhaps of blows; and what is the result of
blows?--Eternal enmity--Can the spirit of a De Lancaster endure a blow?
Impossible. Sacred and inviolable as the oath of the young Hannibal
against Rome, would be his resolution to avenge himself upon the giver
of that blow.

Ah, sir, sir! exclaimed Cecilia, are you not going from your point, and
justifying what you truly said was not fitting either for a hero or a
christian? I beg you will allow me to send my nephew out of the room,
for I have something to impart to you, that I would not wish him to
hear.

John, who knew too well what his aunt alluded to, instantly left the
room; but the words were irrevocable; the fatal authority, so congenial
with his feeling, had sunk into his heart never to be eradicated.

As soon as he was gone Cecilia apologized to her father for the
interruption she had been guilty of; she said, that knowing, as she did,
that her nephew had for a considerable time past harboured resentment
against young Owen for a blow, she could not but regret that he should
hear a justification of his resentment from such high authority as she
feared would outweigh any thing, that his tutor could advise against it.

Whether this remark, which was confessedly not very politic on the part
of poor alarmed Cecilia, or the consciousness of having overshot his
argument, piqued and disconcerted the good old man, certain it is he did
not receive his daughter’s apology with his usual suavity and candour,
but coldly answered that he was not bound to revoke his opinions merely
because they might not chance to conform with those of Mr. Wilson; and
least of all, said he, should I have suspected that you, Cecilia, who
have ever shewn such deference to my authority, should be alarmed lest
it might outweigh that of any other person.

Heaven forbid, cries Cecilia, that I should ever fail to reverence that
wisdom, which I am of an age to comprehend, but which a youth like my
nephew may misconceive and construe not according to reason and its true
sense, but according to the bent and impulse of his own passions.

You are right, said De Lancaster, recovering his complacency, you are
right, my dear child, and I am sorry that I alluded to the example of
young Hannibal, as I have ever disapproved of Hanno for bringing him at
so early an age to the altar, and implanting hatred and revenge in his
heart by a solemn oath for ever. All this while take notice, I am an
enemy to blows; I never struck your brother Philip in my life, nor
should allow of his striking my grandson John; at the same time there
are blows, that inflict no disgrace; the blows for instance, that are
received in battle, when combating the enemies of our country, where the
hero, although bleeding with his wounds, spares the life of the
opponent, who asks it of him and submits himself to his mercy. I shall
speak upon this more at large to my grandson, and define to him the
several characters and descriptions of blows in such a manner, as may
enable him to distinguish which may be passed over, and which may not;
copying the example of the Sage Chiron the Centaur, who, when tutoring
his pupil young Achilles upon the nature of blows, put a whip into his
hand, and set him astride on his own back, threatening at the same time
to kick him off without mercy, if he ventured to make use of it.

With submission to your better judgment, said Cecilia, smiling at the
ridiculousness of the allusion, I should conceive it may be well to
postpone this lecture till our young Achilles is more able to understand
it, and in the meantime, till this matter of the ham-strung horse is
cleared up, to send him out of harm’s way with his tutor Mr. Wilson, who
meditates to pay a visit to his parish, and has, as you well know,
repairs and improvements to superintend at his parsonage house, where
your people are at work for his accommodation.

Your advice is excellent, my dear Cecilia, cried De Lancaster, rising
from his seat, and shall be strictly followed: Let John be off with the
lark to-morrow morning, and no fear but, in the peaceful mansion of the
christian teacher of forgiveness, he will recover his tranquillity, and
consign all injuries to oblivion.

It was not many minutes after this conversation had passed, when Mr. De
Lancaster, addressing himself to his friend Wilson, said--I perceive, my
good colonel, that the knowledge, which a man gets in his library is of
very little use to himself or others in the world at large: I suspect
that I have been reading every thing to no purpose, whilst Cecilia, who
has read scarce any thing, is wiser than I am.

Aye my good sir, replied Wilson, ’tis even so: we must carry our grey
hairs to school, and learn wisdom of our children. If we would wish to
know what the world is about, we must not enquire of those, who are out
of it, but of those, who are in it.




CHAPTER III.

_Our Hero sets out upon a Visit to his Tutor at his Parsonage House.
Occurrences by the Way._


In a fine autumnal morning, whilst the sun was mounting in the clear
horizon, the Reverend Mr. Wilson and his pupil took their departure from
the castle. They had not less than twenty Welch computed miles to
traverse over a romantic country before they reached the parsonage house
at Shells, now prepared for their reception. What were the prospects,
that opened upon them by the way, how wild, how various, how sublime, we
shall not study to describe, though all the requisites of mountain, wood
and water are at our command, and court us to employ them. If these
beautiful objects lost their effect upon our hero John, it was in great
part owing to another beautiful object, not then present, which greatly
occupied his thoughts, as the immediate scene of his meditation just
then laid at Denbigh, where the young Amelia, unseen but not forgotten,
still kept possession of his heart. The point, towards which he was
shaping his course, would bring him nearer to Denbigh by more than half
the distance between that place and Kray Castle, and though his mind was
not perfectly at peace with respect to Mrs. Jennings, he felt every
tender sentiment for her unoffending charge, and cherished a fond hope
that some happy opportunity might occur to repay him for the
disappointment he had met with and the long absence he had endured.

Whilst our young hero, wholly occupied in these meditations, was
incautiously riding along a slippery path in his descent from the
heights, his horse’s footing failed him and he fell upon his knees:
being an active horseman he lost neither his seat nor his temper, but it
brought other ideas to his recollection, and turning to his companion he
calmly observed, that had his favourite Glendowr been under him, nothing
of that sort could have happened--and what a treasure, added he, have I
been defrauded of? what kind of heart must that man have who could turn
a fine animal, that had been cloathed and pampered in the stable, naked
on a barren heath, only because an uncle, who had left him every think
else, had bequeathed this one token of his remembrance to me as his
godson?

At this instant lawyer Davis rode up to them on a brisk gallop, and
saluting them as he reined in his horse, cried out--Well met,
gentlemen; I thought I kenn’d you as I crossed the hill, and hastened to
give you the intelligence, that I am carrying to the castle, of my
having got such information, as will secure ample damages for the loss
of Sir Owen’s legacy of the horse, and expose to the world one of the
basest and most rascally transactions, that was ever brought to light.

As Davis uttered these words young John De Lancaster turned a look upon
Mr. Wilson that could not fail to be understood, and desired Davis to
relate the particulars--They are soon told, he replied, for the informer
Joe Johnson, who was feeder to Sir Owen’s hounds, has deposed, that by
the express order of his present master the young baronet betook the
horse called Owen Glendowr out of the stable in the evening of the 12th
instant, and accompanied by the said Sir David led him to a bye spot on
the mountain, where in a dell they contrived by ropes to cast, and then
and there to hamstring him by deep incisions on the sinews of his legs,
leaving the poor mangled animal to expire in tortures. Johnson describes
his reluctance to obey commands of so barbarous a nature, but his master
was peremptory, and had caused him to be plied with liquor till he was
so intoxicated, that unless Sir David himself had assisted in the act,
he could not have executed it.

Davis having related these particulars, addressing himself to Mr. Edward
Wilson, added--’Tis a villainous business, reverend sir, a very
villainous business, and if old Mr. De Lancaster shall think fit to
bring it into court, I would not be in Sir David’s case for his estate.
Mr. De Lancaster will do no such thing, said Wilson, that you may rely
upon--No, no, cried John, ’tis not a case to be settled in that way: I’m
satisfied my grandfather will not resort to the law, nor accept of any
compensation for the injury I have suffered from Sir David Owen and his
dog-kennel accomplice. The man, who degrades his character by an action
of that sort, puts his person out of the reach of a gentleman’s
resentment.

This said, the conference broke off: the companions proceeded on their
way, and Davis shaped his course towards the mansion of De Lancaster.

When there arrived and admitted to an audience in the library, he stated
facts rather more circumstantially from the chair than he had done from
the saddle, and having concluded, the old gentleman remained silent for
some time, pondering in his mind the measures he should take: at length,
breaking forth in a tone, that bespoke his resolution formed, he
said--Davis, we must save this wretched young man, if it be possible.
He, who has dabbled in the blood of an animal, may be wrought by
desperation to attempt the life of a fellow creature: he is young, and
may be turned to better thoughts; I am old, and must not be extreme in
justice: Furthermore, I must confess to you, Davis, that I am not quite
reconciled to the means we have taken for eliciting this information
from a scoundrel dog-feeder by the lure of a reward. Your law, I know,
allows it; but your law and my conscience do not always harmonize. This
very fellow, whom we have paid for confessing the act, was probably
paid also for committing it: that is a traffic in iniquity, which I am
sorry to have countenanced. However I will write to Mrs. David Owen, who
in her twofold capacity of mother and guardian, seems the properest
person to recall this young offender to a due contrition for his
offence.

I should doubt that, Davis replied; I am much afraid, worthy sir, you
would not mend your chance by that appeal; for I have another unlucky
evidence in my possession of a damned Jew’s trick in the article of the
diamond ring--

Speak to the point, friend Davis, said the old gentleman, but spare your
expletives; for oaths are not ornaments to an honest man’s discourse--

I ask pardon, rejoined Davis; but really, sir, when one hears of such
scandalous practices, as are carried on in that family between mother
and son, it is enough to make a parson swear--

I should hope not, said De Lancaster; but what do you allude to?--

Why you must know, replied the lawyer, I had my suspicions that all was
not right in the going of the diamond ring, bequeathed to Madam Cecilia,
and reported _non est inventus_; so it came into my mind, that it might
not be amiss to put the old proverb into practice, and set a thief to
catch a thief--

Speak, if you please, without a proverb, said the good old man; I shall
comprehend you better; for in my opinion, Mr. Davis, when our
conversation is to turn upon thieves, the sooner it is concluded, so
that we may dismiss them from our thoughts, the better it will be for us
both.




CHAPTER IV.

_The Humanity of De Lancaster is not permitted to obtain its End._


Our readers will recollect a certain Jew pedlar, Israel Lyons by name,
of whom we have heretofore made mention: this man was in the habit of
employing Davis as his man of business for collecting debts, and
enforcing payments. In the course of his late circuit he had called upon
him, and consulted him upon a secret transaction he had engaged in with
Mrs. Owen respecting a diamond ring of considerable value, which he was
to dispose of in Holland on her account, and for which he had deposited
security in her hands. Upon the production of this ring Davis instantly
recognised it to be the very ring devised to Cecilia by Sir Owen in his
will. Lyons, who immediately saw the danger of his negotiation in its
proper light, readily consented to accompany Davis to Kray Castle for
the purpose of more fully identifying the ring, and to this it was that
Davis alluded, when he was answered by De Lancaster, as was related in
the preceding chapter. He now shewed the ring to that gentleman, who no
sooner cast his eyes upon it, than he said--Put it by! I am satisfied.

So was not Davis, but importunately demanded how he was to proceed--Not
at all, replied De Lancaster, not at all. I am neither prepared to blast
the heir of the Owens for the consideration of a horse, which I can
replace from my own stable, nor the mother of that heir for a bauble,
which I desire you will return to the pedlar, and take care that I have
no concern with dog-feeders, or with Jews.

Davis, struck with astonishment, exclaimed--This is above my
comprehension; it must be as you please; but you will give me leave to
take care of myself, and keep out of the scrape of compromising felony.

With these words he departed, and a servant, entering the room at the
same moment, announced the names of three gentlemen, who solicited a
private conference with Mr. De Lancaster; they were persons of
respectability in the county, but not in the habit of visiting at the
castle, being of the opposite party in politics, and zealously attached
to the interests of the ancient house of Owen.

The venerable owner of Kray Castle met them at the door of his
apartment, and received them with all possible courtesy and respect.
When they were seated, Sir Arthur Floyd (a name not new to the reader of
this history) opened the business as follows--

We wait upon you, Mr. De Lancaster, as friends of the lately deceased
Sir Owen ap Owen, and in virtue of the regard, in which we hold his
memory, are solicitous to preserve the like good opinion of the
successor to his estate and title. A report, which, if true, would stamp
indelible disgrace upon his character, has reached us, relative to his
treatment of a certain favourite horse, which our departed friend
bequeathed to your grandson; we know you lived on terms of friendship
with Sir Owen, and we trust you will participate in our motives, when we
request you (who must of course be acquainted with the particulars, we
are anxious to be informed of) to say whether or not there is any
foundation for the report we allude to.

Gentlemen, said De Lancaster, it is a fact that the horse, which you
describe as a favourite of my late friend, was bequeathed by him to my
grandson John.

And is your grandson now in possession of that horse? In plainer terms,
is the horse alive? This question was not put by Sir Arthur Floyd, and
Mr. De Lancaster, turning to him, with some discomposure demanded, if it
were expected of him to answer all manner of interrogatories in a case,
which he was desirous of dismissing from his thoughts.

To this Sir Arthur Floyd replied, that with all imaginable respect for
his character as a gentleman of the highest honour, they did expect of
him to answer all such questions, as might be honourably put to him in
the matter of a charge so fatal to the reputation of Sir David Owen, if
true; so injurious, if false. We presume also to remind you, sir, that
where the name of De Lancaster is attached to a report, it is such an
authority as no man can dispute, and of course no man ought to doubt.
Upon a point of honour therefore, which by consequence affects yourself
not less than it does us, we conjure you to tell us plainly whether the
horse be dead or living.

The horse is dead; in that state he was found by my grandson and his
servant on the heath.

You will permit us to ask, said one of the party, if there were not
marks of violence upon the carcase; in short, sir, was not the horse
hamstrung upon all his legs?

I am told he was.

Was there any enquiry made as to the perpetrator, or perpetrators, of
that butchery?

I am constrained to say there was. Lawyer Davis made enquiry.

And when lawyer Davis traced out the perpetrators of that most shameful
act, have the goodness to inform us whether he did, or did not, find
evidence to implicate Sir David Owen as a party in the act itself.

Let lawyer Davis answer that himself, replied De Lancaster in a firm
tone of voice; I decline it, and you must excuse me.

We shall refer ourselves to lawyer Davis, said the spokesman, and we
hope you will permit your grandson and his servant to attend on the
occasion. If we find Sir David Owen guilty on the charge, this will be
no country for him to live in; at least he cannot live in it with us. In
the mean time we thank you, worthy sir, for your very handsome reception
of us, and shall be ever forward to bear testimony to your candour and
delicacy towards the character of a most unhappy young man, if our fears
prove true. We are sensible, Mr. De Lancaster, you could have said much
more, and we know that it was honour alone, that extorted from you what
you did say, and generosity, that suppressed what you did not say.

The party were now rising to take their leave, when the old gentleman
entreated their patience for a few minutes--we have been discoursing, he
said, upon a very unpleasant subject. The young man, who now wears the
title of my departed friend, is just entering on the world, and being
native of another country, and not educated amongst us, may perhaps have
been betrayed into some irregularities, that cannot stand a rigid
scrutiny; I will venture therefore to submit to you, whether it may not
be advisable to let this affair pass over without any further
investigation, assured as you may be, that the charge shall never be
stirred by me, or any one of my family.

To this Sir Arthur Floyd made answer as follows--What you have now
proposed to us, Mr. De Lancaster, is a proof of that candour and
benignity, which have ever marked your character; but you know full well
what has long been the state of party interests in this county, and to
which side we have hitherto adhered; you must also be aware that the day
is not far off, when probably we must again declare ourselves: It
behoves us therefore to be made secure of the honour and character of
that gentleman, young although he is, on whom that consequence and
leading interest have devolved, which we have been accustomed to look up
to. We must therefore in our own justification decline your generous
proposal, which we are convinced you would not have made, had you not
been satisfied, or suspicious at least, of the young man’s criminality.

This said they rose, and with much courteous ceremony on both sides took
their leave, and departed.




CHAPTER V.

_Philip De Lancaster sets out upon his Travels._


When De Lancaster had reseated himself in his chair, and devoted a few
minutes to meditation, the door of his library was opened, and our young
hero respectfully approached him to receive his welcome and embrace.

What brings thee hither, John De Lancaster? said the grandfather.

My father sent for me.

That’s true; that’s true. He would take his leave of you before he sets
out upon his journey to the south of France. An opinion has prevailed
that your mother must winter in a warmer climate, and your father is
going to make preparations for her residence at Montpelier. Upon these
occasions I do not chuse to interpose: he will follow his own fancy, and
that is about as likely to lead him to Jerusalem as to Montpelier: and
your mother, John, your mother, never will go hence but to her grave.
Nature is in absolute decay; her vital powers are exhausted, and
Llewellyn either knows her inability to undertake the journey, or is
blockhead enough to believe it practicable, and knows nothing of his
business. You will say, why do I not dissuade your father from setting
out upon this fruitless journey? I answer, because it is not worth my
while; for whom does it concern in what spot of earth upon this
habitable globe a listless creature doses out unprofitable time? Let him
go, let him go; I rest no further hopes on him. The tree, which
emblematically bears the fortunes of my house, is withering at the top,
dead in its middle branches, whilst there is yet one scyon, that has
life and vigour: Yes, my child, I am passing away; thy father is gone
by, but thou, with the blessing of providence, art springing up and
bursting into bloom, I have thy tutor’s testimony strongly vouched in
thy favour, and with rapture I contemplate the auspicious promise of
those dawning virtues, which in the riper character of the man will be
the ornament and safe-guard of our ancient stock. And now, John, I must
apprise thee of an affair, that will put those virtues to the test. Some
neighbouring gentlemen, who are amongst the chief supporters of the Owen
interest, have this morning been with me to enquire into the
circumstances of Sir David’s treatment of you in the matter of the horse
bequeathed to you by your godfather; and they are determined to call
upon you and Davis for your evidence, that they may sift it to the
bottom.

With all my heart, cried John, the colour mounting to his cheeks. I
desire nothing better than to meet Sir David Owen face to face, and
depose what I know of that rascally transaction in the most public
manner before all his friends, be they who they may.

Hold, hold, my child, said De Lancaster, you must not forget how much
modesty and forbearance become your years. You must put all angry
thoughts aside, when you are called upon to speak the truth without
prejudice or animosity; and that you may be kept in mind of that duty, I
shall desire your worthy tutor to accompany you to that discussion.

I hope you will not think that necessary, John replied, for if I have
nothing to do but to speak the truth, I trust I do not want a tutor to
teach me that.

Go then, said De Lancaster; be it as thou sayest! for I perceive the
spirit of my race, which has passed over thy father, descends upon thee.
Go, when thou art called for; but remember, truth must not be told with
aggravation, nor in our resort to justice must we gratify revenge.

At this moment Mr. Philip De Lancaster walked into the room, and
addressing himself after his cool manner to his son--You are come just
in time, he said, for I have taken leave of your mother, and have
nothing to do but to pay my duty to my father, and set out upon my
journey. I leave you in the care of such good friends, that you stand in
no need of any advice from me; and, if you did, I know not what else I
could say to you, but to recommend it to you to be a good boy, to pay
attention to your tutor, to carry yourself dutifully to your
grandfather, mother and aunt, to recollect that you are but a child in
age and understanding, and in a word to mind your book and say your
prayers. Now go up to your mother; she expects you in her bed chamber;
tread softly, (do you mind) and be careful of alarming her, for, though
she bore parting from me with perfect tranquillity, the least noise will
shake her nerves, and throw her into tremors.

I shall observe your caution, sir, the youth replied; but if it is your
pleasure that I should attend upon you again before you take your
departure, I will simply pay my duty to my mother, and wait upon you to
your carriage.

No, no, child, cried the father, there is no occasion for that ceremony.
I don’t wish any body to attend upon me to my carriage, but the
servant, that goes with me.

The disappointed youth cast a parting look of sensibility on his father,
bowed respectfully and left the room.

I perceive, son Philip, said the old gentleman, that, nearly allied as
you are to my grandson John, you are not acquainted with his manly
character, when you talk to him as to a child--but of this we will say
no more--so long as I have life his education will be my care, and at my
death it will be found I have not been less careful of his interest. You
are now going to the continent, and I sincerely wish you health and a
pleasant tour; but if you calculate upon Mrs. De Lancaster’s chance of
ever reaching Montpelier, I greatly fear you will be disappointed, and I
therefore recommend it to you to postpone providing an establishment
for her there or elsewhere, till you are further advised from us. Your
equipage I see is waiting, and nothing remains for me, but to bid you
heartily farewell.

This said, they both rose, embraced and parted never to meet again.




CHAPTER VI.

_Dark Doings at the Abbey of Penruth._


When long disease hath sapped the vital powers, and death creeps on by
painless slow approaches, the mind is oftentimes observed to assume a
dignified composure, and even an elevation of sentiment, which did not
appear to belong to it in the body’s better health: so it was with the
mother of our hero. She was reposing on her couch with Cecilia sitting
by her side, and when her son approached raised herself up to receive
him--I am delighted to see you, my dear child, she said, and I hope your
grandfather will consent to your residing in the castle for the very
short time I have yet to live: though I have little strength to hold
discourse with you, yet it is a consolation to know you are within my
call, and that, so long as sight is not taken from me, I may gratify
that sense--nay, my beloved son, don’t shed a tear for me--rather
rejoice that I am drawing near to the end of a dull journey, joyless at
the best, and not less wearisome to others than to myself. I have parted
from your father: if he persuades himself that I shall follow him, it is
a harmless delusion; if he does not, it is a commodious plea to escape
a trouble, and exchange a melancholy scene for an amusing one; at all
events, whatever object he may have in view, I hope that you, who have
never experienced his care, will have no occasion to lament his absence.

To this John made some answer not necessary to record, when by a signal
from his aunt understanding that his mother stood in need of silence and
repose, he took the hint and quietly departed. The project of his
passing a few weeks with Mr. Wilson at the parsonage was now laid aside,
and in compliance with his mother’s wishes, he resumed his station and
his studies at the castle, holding himself ever ready to obey her
summons, when she wished to see him.

The next morning brought Sir Arthur Floyd once more to the castle. He
came to ask the favour of young De Lancaster’s company at his own house,
and that he would allow his servant Williams to attend together with
lawyer Davis, who would provide himself with the deposition of Sir
David’s feeder. It was matter of no small regret to the good old man
that these gentlemen were so resolute to persist in their investigation
of this odious business, but having pledged his word, he would not
retract it, and young John who had not all those repugnant feelings,
which his grandfather had, was speedily equipped, and having put himself
under the convoy of Sir Arthur Floyd, soon found himself in his
conductor’s house, and greeted with all possible politeness by the
gentlemen there assembled. Sir David Owen was not yet arrived, and some
began to doubt if he would attend the meeting. At length he was
discovered coming down the avenue, followed by his huntsman and his
groom, himself and his attendants being in the uniform of the hunt.

Upon his entering the room, where the company had assembled, he either
did not see, or chose to take no notice of De Lancaster: but observing
to the gentlemen, that having understood them to be called together for
the purpose of arranging the rules and regulations of the union-hunt, he
expected to have found them in their proper colours, and wished to be
informed if any thing had occurred to give them dissatisfaction.

We naturally expect that question from you, said Sir Arthur Floyd, and
are prepared to answer, that until you can vindicate yourself from a
charge, that is made against you, we are and ought to be dissatisfied,
and therefore it is we do not shew our colours, till we are convinced by
you we need not be ashamed to wear them.

How am I to convince you of that, gentlemen, but by wearing them myself?
However as you insinuate, that a charge is made against me, let me know
the nature of that charge, and who it is, that presumes to circulate any
thing to my discredit.

Hear me with patience, Sir Arthur replied, and I will state it to you
without aggravation. You are suspected to have mal-treated the favourite
horse Glendowr, which your uncle left by will to this young gentleman,
Mr. John De Lancaster, here present.

I see that he is present, but I do not see the right by which he meets
the members of a hunt, that he has no concern with. He is here however;
such is your pleasure, and I presume he is here for some purpose, best
known to yourselves. I am suspected, it seems: what answer can I give to
that? Can you substantiate any charge against me? If you can, state it.

This it is, said Sir Arthur, rising from his seat--The horse, that
consistently with the manners of a gentleman, ought to have been
delivered according to the purport of your uncle’s will, or at least
carefully retained in your stable, was unhandsomely turned out upon the
mountain, and there found hamstrung in every leg, most barbarously and
feloniously mangled, and dying dead upon the ground.

Who found him there?

I found him, young De Lancaster replied; I and my servant found him
there, and in that very condition, which you have heared described.

Well, if you did, what is all that to me?

It is to you, rejoined Sir Arthur Floyd, if the deposition of your own
menial servant, charging you as the instigator to, and accomplice in,
that barbarous act, cannot be done away. This man is now waiting with
Mr. Davis the attorney, ready to substantiate his averment upon oath,
and I am the magistrate, that will administer it to him, if you so
require.

Not I, not I, exclaimed the haughty culprit: I will not condescend to
answer to a charge, that is evidenced by a dog-feeder, contrived,
abetted and encouraged by a mercenary attorney. I came to meet you here
as brother sportsmen, I find you what I will not say. As for that
attorney, whom I know to be in the pay and employ of my enemy, I hold
him as a wretch too despicable for any notice on my own account; let
him propagate and pursue his charge against me as he will, I care not;
but I accuse him, and will have him prosecuted to the utmost rigour of
the law, as the slanderer and defamer of my innocent and injured mother.

Davis, who had entered the room, unseen of young Owen, and planted
himself behind his chair, now stept forward, and demanded to know of
what he was accused. It was not immediately that the arrogance of this
hardened youth, thus taken by surprise, could recover from his
embarrassment; at length, after some hesitation, being again called upon
to explain himself, he turned to Davis with an assumed air of bravery,
and said--I am given to understand you have not scrupled to affix upon
my mother Mrs. Owen the abominable scandal of having secreted a
valuable diamond ring, which appears in my uncle’s will as a legacy to
Mrs. Cecilia De Lancaster; but which ring after the minutest search is
no where to be found. This I aver to be a libel of the grossest sort.

And so it would be, I confess, said Davis, were I not provided with
evidence to prove that this same valuable diamond ring was found by Mrs.
Owen, and by her consigned to the Jew Israel Lyons, under the seal of
secresy, and upon security by him given for the value, to be by him
taken out of the kingdom and sold in Holland on her account and for her
emolument. I have the ring here in my hand ready to produce, the very
ring, which was bequeathed by your uncle, and which you say could not be
found amongst the effects of the deceased. Bear witness for me,
gentlemen, I am compelled to produce this article in my own defence, and
do not voluntarily disobey the positive injunctions of my worthy patron
Mr. De Lancaster, who honourably commanded me to stifle the discovery,
and put up with any injuries, rather than expose the parties to shame,
so much more care had that good gentleman for them than they have had
for themselves; but thus accused, and forced on my defence, what could I
do but what I now have done?

To this no answer was attempted: astonishment seized the company: Sir
David Owen started from his seat, and glancing a malicious look upon our
young hero as he passed him--I’ll not forget you, sir, he cried: the
time will come when you shall hear of this.




CHAPTER VII.

_Events consequential of the Meeting at Sir Arthur Floyd’s. The last
Chapter of the Second Book._


As soon as the convicted baronet had made his hasty exit, the parties
present in their court of honour on the spot unanimously adjudged him
infamous, and with one voice voted him unworthy of their acquaintance.
The question was stirred if any notice should be taken of the ring,
produced by Davis in his own defence. To this it was objected, that as
it had no concern with the case immediately before them, it was
conceived advisable to pass it over, and leave Mr. De Lancaster to act
as he saw fit. They had heard with indignation the insolent menace,
which Owen had thrown out as he was leaving the room, and they
unanimously besought our hero to treat it with its due contempt; Sir
Arthur Floyd in particular insisted upon his right, as master of the
house, to take all such affronts upon himself: John made his
acknowledgment to the speaker with a respectful bow, but offered no
reply.

When he called for his horse to return to the castle, they were six in
number, all principal supporters of the Owen interest, who mounted at
the same time, and having escorted him every step of the way to his
home, rode with him into the castle court, where the venerable host,
summoned by the tolling of his porter’s bell, presented himself to bid
them welcome at the great hall door: his orange-tawney livery-men stood
behind him in their files, and he ushered them into the saloon, where
they were received in form by Cecilia, who was there attending with
Colonel Wilson and his son Edward, the preceptor of their companion
John.

When all introductory ceremonials were over, Sir Arthur Floyd, their
spokesman as before, recounted briefly what had passed, and the
resolution they had taken of abandoning an unworthy connection, and for
the future giving their support decidedly in favour of the house of
Lancaster, whenever opportunity presented itself of demonstrating their
attachment.

To this De Lancaster made answer, that the honour they conferred upon
him, was at once so unexpected and so unmerited, that he felt himself
ill prepared to find expressions, that might do justice to his
feelings.--My holdings, he said, in this county, it is well known are
not of yesterday; they have devolved upon me through a series of
ancestors, in whose steps I have endeavoured to tread, and to whose
politics and opinions, (as far as I could guess what they would have
been in these times by what they appear to have been in their own) I
have steadily adhered. Little as I know of the secrets of government, I
may have been in error; but if I have been pertinacious in opinion, I
trust I have never been found illiberal or unneighbourly to those
honourable gentlemen, who differed from me. I lived in friendship with
Sir Owen, and we never suffered politics to damp the harmony of our
social hours. I lamented his death; but the disgrace, that has fallen on
his family in the person of his successor, is to me extremely grievous:
I fear it has gone too far to be entirely remedied, but some alleviation
may perhaps be thought of, if in addition to the honour you have
already shewn me, you will be pleased to confirm our friendly contract
by consenting to partake my homely meal.

The hospitality of Kray Castle was in no danger of being put out of
countenance by any want of preparation; the guests sate down to a
plenteous board, and the genius of Cecilia added elegance to abundance.
What the benevolence of De Lancaster could obtain for Sir David Owen
amounted only to a general promise, that the affair should be allowed to
sleep, and no further notice taken of any thing, that passed during the
discussion at Sir Arthur Floyd’s.

It is to be presumed that De Lancaster was punctilious in returning the
visit of every gentleman, who had dined with him at the castle. On these
occasions he was constantly accompanied by his grandson, so that the
old state coach and fat horses were for a time in more than ordinary
requisition.

Whilst they were upon a visit at Sir Arthur Floyd’s a very beautiful
horse, which was purposely led out of the stable, attracted every body’s
notice, and particularly that of our young hero, who ran out of doors to
have a nearer view of him. A little stable-boy was mounted on his back,
and put him through his paces on the lawn before the house: the
gentleness of the fine animal was as much to be admired as the beauty.
John was asked if he would back him; the proposal was immediately
accepted, and as there was a fine expanse of lawn for John’s equestrian
performances, he took a considerable circuit, and having given a very
handsome specimen of his jockeyship, returned in perfect raptures with
the horse, pronouncing him to be incomparably the best he had ever
mounted, his lamented favourite Glendowr alone excepted. The horse was
put into the stable, and nothing more passed upon the subject at that
time.

In the evening John returned with his grandfather to the castle, when
upon stepping out of the coach, a letter was put into his hand, that had
the signature of the several gentlemen of the new coalition, and was to
the following purport--

              “Dear Sir,

     As you seemed pleased with the horse, which we invited you to make
     trial of, we have taken the liberty of putting him into your
     stable, and jointly request that you will not refuse to gratify us
     by your acceptance of him. When we tell you he is full brother to
     Glendowr, we flatter ourselves we cannot better recommend him to
     you, and when we assure you, that we can no otherwise be reconciled
     to the disgrace of our late connection with Sir David Owen, except
     by your allowing us to present you with this token of our esteem,
     we trust you will not mortify us by a refusal.

                     We have the honour to be,
                                            &c. &c.”

Though John was highly delighted with this present, he did not consider
himself secure in the possession of it, till he had submitted the letter
to his grandfather. The good old man was under no difficulty as to his
decision, for luckily this was one of the few questions, that in his
contemplation did not wear two faces; so that he said at once, applying
himself to his friend Colonel Wilson--I see no reason why my grandson
should decline this very handsome compliment.

There is no reason, said the colonel.

And why is there none? rejoined the other: why, but because a horse, or
a sword, is by all the rules of chivalry, a present of honour, which it
is no degradation to accept, though it were tendered to a general or a
prince?

I conceive it degrades no man to accept a present from a friend.

I am not sure of that. Friendship can sanctify many things, but not all.
An equipoise of favours is essential to friendship, but an overweight
throws it out of its balance: it then becomes patronage, and the party
obliged incurs a debt, which although it be the debt of gratitude,
entails a duty upon him, and is not of the true spirit of friendship.
Therefore it is that a king can hardly have a real friend--“Gods, how I
should love Augustus, said a certain Roman, if he were not Cæsar.” The
anecdote is to the point of my remark.

I dare say it is, said the Colonel, but I cannot exactly understand how
it applies to the point in question.

If you allude to the question whether my grandson John should accept the
horse, that is settled; there cannot be two opinions in that case:
favours of that sort are not to be refused.

I rejoice to hear it, rejoined the colonel, for I consider it as an
earnest of future favours, when my friend John shall be of age to take
the duties of our county member on himself, unanimously chosen.

Ah my good friend, said the old man and sighed, that day is distant, and
that chance is doubtful: in the meantime my all depends upon a single
stake, and though your worthy son is he of all mankind, in whom I can
repose the fullest trust, yet in the life of that beloved youth, on whom
I rest my hopes, there is a period yet to pass full of alarm and danger.
John has an ardent spirit, and I fear is much more likely to resent
affronts than treat them with contempt. If this malicious Owen is to
live amongst us, and persist in his unworthy practices, I can foresee
the time must come, when my brave boy will bring him to account. Who can
prevent it? not the donors of his horse; their handsome present may
repair his loss, but will it make atonement for the insult he has
received? What can I do? I am not the man to talk to him: young as he
is, he has possessed himself of my sentiments, and I cannot retract
what I have said. Talk to him yourself; you are a soldier, and upon a
point of honour no man can speak with more authority: try if you can
persuade him to think as you do.

Were I to do that, my good sir, replied the colonel, I fear your
grandson would not derive security of person from the rules of practice,
that men of my profession are compelled to follow; but I can hold my
tongue, and that is quite as much as I will undertake for in any case,
where the honour of your family is brought into question. I love your
gallant boy; every body loves him; but what I would not say to my own
son, I could not say to him. I am however inclined to believe that Sir
David Owen will in no future time find resolution to insult your
grandson; but, if he does, I cannot find resolution to dissuade him
from taking proper notice of it.

Well! let it pass, resumed De Lancaster. My boy must take his fate. I
had no right to look for other sentiments from you, and if they are, as
I suspect, irreconcilable to reason and religion, we are both of us I
fear in the same condemnation.

       *       *       *       *       *

If in the long course of my literary labours I had been less studious to
adhere to nature and simplicity, I am perfectly convinced I should have
stood higher in estimation with the purchasers of copy rights, and
probably been read and patronized by my contemporaries in the proportion
of ten to one. To acquire a popularity of name, which might set the
speculating publishers upon out-bidding one another for an embryo work
(perhaps in meditation only) seems to be as proud and enviable a
pre-eminence as human genius can arrive at: but if that pre-eminence has
been acquired by a fashion of writing, that luckily falls in with the
prevailing taste for the romantic and unnatural, that writer, whosoever
he may be, has only made his advantage of the present hour, and
forfeited his claim, upon the time to come: having paid this tribute to
popularity, he certainly may enjoy the profits of deception, and take
his chance for being marked out by posterity (whenever a true taste for
nature shall revive) as the misleader and impostor of the age he lived
in.

The circulation of a work is propagated by the cry of the many; its
perpetuity is established by the fiat of the few. If we have no concern
for our good name after we have left this world, how do we greatly
differ from the robber and assassin?--But this is nothing but an old
man’s prattle. Nobody regards it--We will return to our history.


                        END OF THE SECOND BOOK.




                            BOOK THE THIRD.




CHAPTER I.

_The Mother of our Hero, being at the Point of Death, takes her last
Farewell of her Father-in-law._


The order of our history requires us to attend upon the worthy
grandfather of our hero to the death-bed of his daughter-in-law, who had
expressed a wish to see him. She took his hand, and pressing it to her
heart, said--I thank you, sir, for this and all the proofs of kindness,
which you have uniformly been pleased to show me, though I am conscious
it has never been my happy lot to contribute to your comforts, or to
reflect either grace or ornament upon your family, even in the slightest
degree. Of your son my husband I forbear to speak; when he took his
departure, and left me on the plea of providing a retreat for me upon
the continent, I was too well apprised of my situation not to know that
we should meet no more, and under that impression I took leave of him
for ever. I have given an heir to your name and family, for whose dear
sake, from his birth to the present moment, my agitated heart, though I
have laboured to appear composed, has secretly been racked with sad
forebodings. I am a woman, sir, and those presentiments, which your
strong sense would spurn, sink deep in my weak mind--

Here her speech failed her; her breath fluttered, and quitting the hand
of De Lancaster, she snatched at the sheet, as if convulsion had began
to seize her. Cecilia was at hand, but tears had furnished the relief,
which she was advancing to administer, and the subject, which this short
alarm had interrupted, was resumed as follows--

My seeming dereliction of that darling child must have degraded me in
your opinion; you could not fail to think me void of those affections,
which are natural to a mother, and despised me for my seeming
insensibility. Alas, how very different was the state of my too fond,
too feeling heart! But there were reasons, over-ruling reasons--I cannot
tell them now--They will come to your knowledge--Let the charge lie by,
till the defence can meet it. It would have blessed me to have seen my
father; but he cannot come to me, and when I go to him, it will be only
in my body’s passage to its grave. He has kindly anticipated my wishes,
by leaving my dear son sole heir of his estate. Though it is but little
that I have to devise, yet I have made a will; for so much in it as
concerns my son, I trust he will fulfil the obligations I impose upon
him. If he shall live to be of age, and you survive, (which Heaven in
mercy grant) to see that day, all may be well: I leave him in your care;
I have done so always, and have kept my word; I have not made him that
disgustful thing, a mother’s favourite son. Ah sir, correct the errors
of his youth, but control not the affections of his heart. If,
overlooking rank and fortune, they should honourably and worthily be
fixt on merit in obscurity, do not I implore you--it is my last, my
dying petition--do not oppose his choice. There is an humble being in
the world, lovely and full of promise--oh, if she--if she should--

Whilst these words were yet upon her lips, she sunk down upon her bed
as one, whose life had left her in that moment. Whilst Cecilia and the
women in attendance were busied in assisting her, De Lancaster stood in
deep and pensive meditation with his eyes fixed upon her pallid
countenance, and as the tear dropt upon his aged cheek, he said to his
daughter--Your endeavours to restore her will be fruitless: and, if an
easy death is what we helpless mortals ought to wish for, ’tis hardly to
be hoped you may.

This said, he withdrew, and turning into the gallery discovered John
alone, and intent upon the perusal of a paper, which upon seeing his
grandfather he hastily folded up and thrust into his pocket.

John, I would speak to you, said the old gentleman, and bidding him sit
down, addressed him in these words--Young as you are, you are not now
to learn what a precarious tenure we frail mortals hold in any thing on
this side death, to which we all must come.

I understand you, sir; you come to tell me of my mother’s death.

Not altogether so; but if I did, I can believe your excellent preceptor
has prepared you to meet misfortune as becomes you. Methinks you hardly
can have glanced your eye upon a single page in any moral book, that
does not give you lessons of that sort. Even your pagan poets, whilst
with idle levity they counsel you to devote your time to pleasure, give
you at least fair warning of its shortness.

True, sir, but we have better masters than they are, to whom we may
apply. I am aware that there are no hopes for my poor mother; and it is
nothing strange that she should die, who for years past can hardly have
been said to live: but that my father, seeing her condition, could leave
her almost in the article of death, is matter of astonishment to me.

Such is his nature, John; and whether we must call it the defect of head
or heart is more than I can tell. He is gone however, whither I know
not, and she, poor soul, who has known little happiness on earth, is
going where alone it can be sought. Her last care was for
you.--Something there was, some wish that seemed to weigh upon her
heart; but in her effort to express it, nature failed her, and she
fainted.

That--that indeed--cried John, was most unfortunate. Did she let fall no
words to guide conjecture?

Her words, De Lancaster replied, I am perfect in--“There was an humble
being in the world, lovely and full of promise--Oh, if she--if she
should”--There she stopt.

It is enough! John cried. I’ll wait here with your leave till I am
permitted to pay my last sad duty to a parent, whom I have known but at
the close of life.

As Mr. De Lancaster was rising to depart, it occurred to him to enquire
about the paper, which John had so hastily thrust into his pocket--Let
me know, he said, what you were reading so attentively when I entered
the gallery. It seemed a letter, and by the eagerness with which you put
it up, I suspect it may contain some interesting matter: If so, John,
you hardly will conceal it from me.

Certainly not, replied the youth, if you command me to produce it; but
I am sorry that you noticed it, for it will only bring to your
recollection a subject totally unworthy of your thoughts at any time,
especially in a moment like the present. It is, as you supposed, a
letter; an insolent one you may well believe, for it comes from Sir
David Owen; but as he has quitted the country, I hope you will not ask
to see the favour he has bestowed on me at parting.

Grandson, resumed De Lancaster, I am become too much a party in the
subject you allude to, not to be interested in whatever correspondence
you may hold with that dishonourable young man; therefore let me see
what he has written to you.

This authoritative order was instantly obeyed; the letter was delivered,
and De Lancaster read as follows--

     “You have begun very early in life, young gentleman, to take a
     decided part against me and my family, and you are not to wonder,
     if henceforward and for ever I shall be found to act with
     reciprocal hostility towards you and your’s.

     “You have arraigned my character in the matter of the horse, and
     the oldest and firmest friends of my house have been spirited away
     by your grandfather to desert me, and attach themselves to him--Do
     you flatter yourself I can forget this? Are you weak enough to
     suppose I will forgive it?

     “By the right I have over the cattle in my keeping I turned that
     horse out of my stables, and I am free to own it was no
     recommendation to me, that you assumed to have a claim to him,
     which claim you neglected, or was ashamed, to make.

     “As for the ring, which your attorney was instructed to demand, my
     mother, who is not obliged, nor expected to recognise what she
     never saw, has nothing to do with the charge: she has nevertheless
     given it up to your said attorney, and your aunt is at liberty to
     wear it; my consolation is, she can wear no ring of my uncle’s
     giving but as a legatee.

     “As I am not a native of your island, I am leaving it without
     regret. Don’t persuade yourself however that I shall forget what
     has passed, or forfeit any opportunity of avenging my injured
     honour.

                                                  David ap Owen.”




CHAPTER II.

_The Mother of our Hero dies._


De Lancaster having read the letter, inserted in our preceding chapter,
and for a few moments pondered on the contents of it, was about to put
it into his pocket, when his grandson eagerly requested that he would
allow him to keep possession of it--Of what use can it be to you?, said
the old gentleman.

It will remind me, John replied, that I owe the writer of it an answer.

And what sort of answer would you wish to give him?

Exactly such an one, as becomes your grandson.

And what is so becoming as forgiveness?

The writer does not seem to be of that opinion.

Who cares for his opinion, cried De Lancaster? An inconsiderate, rash,
intemperate boy--Let me rather recommend to you the opinion and example
of Pisistratus, who, when supreme in Athens, where every man’s life was
in his power, had the magnanimity to forgive the brutal insult of
Thrasippus, who, when heated with wine, after venting all the foulest
words his malice could suggest, turned upon Pisistratus, as he was
graciously soliciting him to resume his seat at the table, and vented
his filthy rheum in his face: here is a noble instance of forbearance
for you, my dear John: imitate Pisistratus!

Then I must be endowed with the power of Pisistratus, John replied,
before I can aspire to emulate his forbearance: you must also allow Sir
David Owen the plea of drunkenness and of course the loss of reason. If
under these circumstances I had the power of condemning him to death as
an atonement for his insolence, certainly I should not exercise that
power, as it could be no proof of an honourable spirit to revenge myself
upon a defenceless man? and when my word was to decide for life or
death, I should conceive no choice was left to me but to forgive. I can
honour Pisistratus very highly for his royal magnanimity, but I suspect,
my dear grandfather, I must wait till I am a king before I can save
myself from the imputation of cowardice by quoting his example. If I
could suppose myself too great to be dishonoured by an insult, I hope I
should be too generous to be gratified by revenging it.

Grandson, said the old man, (vainly endeavouring to repress his
feelings) I perceive you are too subtle to be caught by sophistry. You
distinguish rightly: the instance I adduced does not apply to the case
in question. Here is your letter; take it, but recollect that your
honour is not yet called upon to notice its contents. Mere malice only
merits your contempt; reserve your spirit for a worthier cause, and may
providence in its mercy grant you length of days! for if you, who seem
born to give the brightest lustre to a name of no mean note, should in
the blossom of your virtues prematurely fall, and I survive to mourn the
extinction of my hopes, and the loss of one so infinitely dear, what
will it avail me that the last sun, which went down in my horizon, threw
a gleam of light, that glittered as it sunk to rise no more?

A signal now given by Cecilia summoned our young hero into his mother’s
chamber. A life passed without pleasure was now about to close in a
death without pain. Though the power of speech was lost, her actions
indicated that she possessed her senses to the last. In her expiring
moments she had grasped the hand of her son so fast in her’s, that it
would have required a stronger effort than he was disposed to make for
disengaging it from her hold, and it was not till several sad minutes
had gone by, when the convulsive nerve relaxed, and the maternal
pressure was no longer felt.

John now withdrew from this melancholy scene, and, retiring to his
chamber, devoted himself for a while to solitary sorrow.

As the deceased had signified a wish to Cecilia, that her remains might
be deposited in the family vault at Glen Morgan, orders were given to
that effect. By what fit messenger to impart the mournful event to the
good old man, who had now lost his only child, was matter of debate till
the Reverend Mr. Wilson offered himself for that errand; this being
adjusted, he set out and was instructed to say that Mr. De Lancaster
with Cecilia, John and Colonel Wilson would accompany the hearse to the
place of burial. Poor old Morgan, now perfectly disabled by the gout,
received the intelligence, for which he was prepared, with becoming
resignation, and a fitter person than Edward Wilson to reconcile him to
that dispensation no where could be found--You see, sir, said the old
man to Wilson, the miserable state I am in, and can witness how
impossible it was for me to have paid the last sad duty of a father to
my dying child. I ought not, and I will not, lament that her exhausted
spirit is at length released, for I know too well that existence has
been burdensome to her, who is no more; but I must ever painfully
reflect, that there was a period in her life, when, had she been open
and sincere in her appeal, I think I was not capable of forcing her to
marry against her inclination: no, let me hope I never was that
tyrant--but alas! that time can never be recalled--She is dead, and he,
that was her choice, is dead, and I, that might, and would, have made
them happy, still languish at the end of life, only to mourn their loss.

Not so, said Wilson, not exactly so; I have a precious relique in my
care, that’s worth your living for.

That’s true, that’s true, cried Morgan. Whilst my grandson John
survives, De Lancaster and I, let death come when it will, may truly
say--_Non toti morimur_.

As the worthy old man emphatically dealt out this scrap of Latin, which
Seneca and his memory had supplied him with, the animation it inspired
was visible to Edward Wilson, who had kept his eyes upon him: one of
those faint fleeting smiles with which even pain and sorrow will at
times be seen to greet a cheering recollection, passed over his
countenance, as he dwelt upon the thought of his beloved grandson, and
Edward was not backward to prolong and heighten the consolatory impulse
by indulging him with various anecdotes to the honour of his pupil, and
fixing his attention on a pleasant topic, which is a secret in _the art
of healing_, that some practitioners either don’t seem to know, or are
not willing to make use of.

It was now in Morgan’s power to circulate his orders to his trusty
house-keeper and butler for the mansion to be prepared, and all things
needful to be put in readiness against the arrival of the family from
Kray Castle. Neither was it omitted to provide an apartment for the
young Amelia, who together with Mrs. Jennings was invited to be present
at the funeral of her patroness and friend.




CHAPTER III.

_The Scene changes to Glen-Morgan._


When the appointed morning came, and the hearse with its attendant
mourners issued from the portal of the court of Kray Castle, the tenants
of De Lancaster presented themselves in a body and fell in respectfully
and silently in rear of the cavalcade; but when Sir Arthur Floyd and the
party of gentlemen, who had dined at the castle attached themselves to
the train, following the coach, in which De Lancaster was seated, till
they came to the last verge of his domain, where the tenants dispersed,
and they approached to pay their valedictory respects, the venerable old
man, overcome even to tears by the unexpected compliment, and, bowing
from the window of his coach, had only strength to say--Gentlemen, I
thank you from my heart! you have conferred an honour and a favour upon
me and mine, which I never shall forget.

When they arrived upon the lands of Glen Morgan, though yet at some
distance from the house, they were again met and escorted by the tenants
and retainers of that ancient and opulent family, till they arrived at
the place of their destination.

Here Mr. De Lancaster, by the persuasion of his daughter, consented to
repose after the fatigue and agitation of the journey, whilst Cecilia
and her nephew, as chief mourners, followed the body to the church,
there to consign it with all solemnity to the vault, where the remains
of the Morgans had been deposited for many generations.

The crowd, which such a spectacle could not fail to bring together, were
not so engrossed by their sorrow as to prevent them from bestowing their
attention on the countenance of the youthful heir, and dull indeed must
have been the eye, which had not discerned that spirit of innate
benevolence, which not all the clouds of sorrow could obscure. Our hero
had now advanced into his eighteenth year; he was tall of stature, erect
in person and of manly growth and proportion. When he led his aunt from
the church, after the solemnity was concluded, and the people, who lined
his passage to the coach, uncovered and in respectful silence paid their
homage, he stopped, looked round, and in a manner at once the most
graceful and most gracious, returned their salutation. It was a look,
set off with such an action, as spoke comfort to the poor, and gave
assurance to all beholders of a kind and noble nature. What sensations
it conveyed to the feeling bosom of the approving Cecilia, is easier to
conceive than to describe: it was not overlooked by Amelia, who beheld
it through her tears, and the interesting glance was not rendered the
less impressive by the tender medium, through which it made its passage
to her heart.

She was leaning on the arm of Mrs. Jennings; conscious that she had no
place in that awful ceremony, she had modestly stood at distance from
those who had; and, it was now for the first time that our hero’s eyes
had been directed towards her. She did not put it in the power of the
chief mourners to offer her a seat in their coach, but carefully avoided
being noticed by them, and walked with Mrs. Jennings from the church to
the house. When there arrived, she did not enter by the hall, but
through the offices, and by a private staircase retired to her chamber,
conducted by the house-keeper.

Cecilia also, after she had paid her respects to the father of the
deceased, repaired to the apartment appointed for her, and dispatched a
servant to Mrs. Jennings and Amelia, requesting the favour of their
company. In a very few minutes the former of these ladies presented
herself, leading by the hand her elegant and lovely charge in deep
mourning, for which Mrs. Jennings took immediate occasion to apologize,
and hoped she should not give offence to any of the family by having so
done. Whilst this was passing, her timid pupil had drawn back, and held
her handkerchief to her eyes at once to hide her tears and her
confusion.

Madam, (said Cecilia in that melodious tone, which charmed all ears) you
have judged correctly right in this particular, as I doubt not but you
have in every other, that has reference to this young lady, who is most
fortunate in being under your protection. Of the propriety of her
wearing mourning there can be no doubt, were it only on account of the
interest she has in Mrs. De Lancaster’s will, where her name will be
found attached to a legacy of two thousand pounds.

Bless me, cried Mrs. Jennings, that is beyond all expectation, and I’m
afraid--

Hold, if you please, said Cecilia (taking Mrs. Jennings by the hand, as
if to apologize for the interruption) and let us sit down, for we keep
this young lady standing, who, if I am not mistaken, has occasion for
repose.--When they were seated, Cecilia proceeded to say, that the
bequest to Miss Jones, which you are pleased to consider as above your
expectation, was only limited, as I have occasion to know, to the sum of
two thousand pounds because the deceased was not possessed of disposable
property sufficient to meet her wishes for making a more ample provision
for the amiable young lady here present; and this, she added, will be
put out of doubt by a particular and very urgent clause in the said
will, in which she recommends and appeals in the most solemn manner to
her son to bear in mind those earnest wishes, which she had imparted to
him, and not forget the promises, which he had made--And now, madam, as
the full purport of this article, which to you may appear mysterious, is
to me and to my nephew also perfectly clear, this amiable young lady may
be assured, that the wishes of the testator in their most extended sense
will be fulfilled by him, to whom they are bequeathed, if Heaven shall
in its mercy grant him life.

If the sensibility of the soul has power without the use of words to
convey its meaning, the look and action, which Amelia now directed to
Cecilia De Lancaster, could not be misunderstood: neither were they,
for that excellent lady, who in that species of eloquence was herself
inferior to none, needed no interpreter, and immediately said--Put
yourself to no exertions, Miss Jones, but withdraw for a time, till you
can recover your spirits, for I readily comprehend both what you feel,
and what you wish to say. If you find yourself disposed to pass a little
time in private, I will undertake for your apology to the company below
stairs.

This said, Amelia rose, made a respectfull obeisance, and withdrew:
Cecilia had given Mrs. Jennings intimation that she wished to be in
private with her, and immediately, resuming her seat, said--That young
lady does you great credit, madam; I declare to you I never yet
contemplated any thing more elegant in manners, or more interesting in
person. I understand she has been some years under your tuition, and as
I am intimately acquainted with Mrs. De Lancaster’s motives for that
anxious attachment to her future fortune, which she manifests in her
will, you will not think me too officious, if I request to be informed
of the plan, which you may have adopted, or in your judgment would
advise, for the further education of this young creature, whose beauty
and attraction at this critical time of life demand no common degree of
care and attention.

Therein, madam, replied Mrs. Jennings, I must refer to better judgment
than my own, and solicit to be ruled by your instruction and advice. I
am a solitary woman, and having no other influence or authority over her
than what her prudence and good will voluntarily concede to me, I must
confess I am not in myself sufficient to encounter every species of
danger, that may possibly occur to alarm me for her sake, and permit me
to add for the sake of one other person also, whom I fear I have too far
offended ever to be forgiven.

If you allude to my nephew, said Cecilia, I beg of you to be explicit.

I own it is to him that I allude, she replied, and as his resentment is
now of so long standing, I have reason to fear I shall never be
forgiven. I confess to you, madam, that when I thought I had discovered
an attachment forming between your nephew and my humble charge, I
considered it as my duty to stop it in its beginning, and prevent their
interviews. This I did, when he last came to my house, and wished to see
Amelia Jones for the purpose of presenting to her a miniature picture
of her father, sent by Mrs. De Lancaster, to which he had added a rich
and elegant chain of gold, which I believe was of his own procuring.
Upon my hesitating to give him immediate admission to Amelia, he left my
house in displeasure, and from that time to this neither myself, nor
Amelia to my knowledge, have either seen him, or been noticed by him in
the slightest degree. If, unfortunately for her, she is involved in an
offence, of which I alone was guilty, you see, madam, how improper it
will be for her, but more especially for me, to remain any longer in
this house, where we must consider ourselves unwelcome to young Mr. De
Lancaster at least, and probably to others, whom I need not name. I
should add, that for Amelia’s sake it behoves us to be gone, as she,
poor child, is distressed by his displeasure to a degree, which, as you
have witnessed, renders her unfit to appear even in your presence, who
are all condescension and benevolence. This being the case, is it for me
to advise what is further to be done for Miss Jones’s education? Am I,
in short, any longer the proper person to conduct it? I humbly conceive
I am not.

To this Cecilia answered--As I draw conclusions from what you have been
stating very different from what you seem to apprehend, I think your
taking Amelia away from us at this time would be the most unadvisable
measure you could adopt and the most irreconcilable to her interest. The
motives, upon which you have hitherto acted towards my nephew, are
certainly very honourable; but you need not pursue them any further; at
least, not with the same degree of rigour. Assure Miss Jones from me,
that she has not the least occasion to be alarmed; let her act as her
own good sense and discretion shall dictate, and I am persuaded you will
not find it necessary to lay any restraint upon her conduct. You will
endeavour therefore to detach her from her solitude and her sorrows as
speedily as you can, and convince her that she will find none but
friends in our circle, regardful of her interests, and anxious for her
happiness.

Mrs. Jennings having made her acknowledgments for these kind assurances,
respectfully withdrew, and hastened to communicate intelligence so
consolatory to her beloved charge, happy to find herself in a great
degree relieved from an anxious responsibility, which had put her upon
assuming a reserve, much more rigid and punctilious than was natural to
her character.




CHAPTER IV.

_Occurrences at Glen Morgan._


In the evening of this very day, after all the melancholy duties
incidental to it had been discharged, John De Lancaster detached himself
from the company, and striking into a gloomy walk of unclipt yew trees,
appertaining to what by courtesy was called the pleasure ground, at the
extremity of it surprised Amelia, solitary and unconscious of his
approach, reposing herself on a seat under the shade of a tree, whose
branches through their openings gave a glimpse of her figure, which
might well have escaped any eyes but those of a lover.

Upon discovering him as he approached, the timid damsel started from her
seat, and was preparing to withdraw, when with that gentle action, which
more resembles intercession than compulsion having induced her to resume
her seat, he said--It has been a long and tedious banishment, to which
your governess condemned me: and since my good fortune has now thrown an
opportunity in my way, which I have ardently wished for, and of which I
may honourably avail myself, don’t think me too importunate, if I
solicit you to give me a hearing whilst I discharge my conscience of a
duty, that I owe to the parent, whom we have this day followed to the
grave. Perhaps Miss Jones, you are not apprised by what solemn
obligations I am bound to consider your honour, interest and happiness
unalienably connected and interwoven with my own. How dear you were to
my departed mother I well know; what I professed to you in our first and
only interview I religiously bear in mind: I have every impression of
your merit, every sensibility of your charms both of mind and person,
that our very short acquaintance could inspire, and by the sacred
solemnity of this day I swear to you, that, if Heaven grants me life, I
will live to your service.

Mr. De Lancaster, she replied, though I cannot at this moment find
expressions for my gratitude, I hope you will believe, that, if I felt
it less, I could express it better. It is indeed a very long time since
you honoured me with your visit, and of course this is the very first
instant I can profit by for returning my most heart-felt thanks for your
invaluable present, which by some misunderstanding on the part of Mrs.
Jennings I have till now unhappily been deprived of doing. As I did not
know that you had been the bearer of that kind present till after you
had left the house, I must not presume to judge of your reasons for
resenting the reception, that you met with from the lady, under whose
care I am; but I may venture to assure you, it was never her intention
to give offence to Mr. De Lancaster, and I must leave it with yourself
to reflect, whether it is consistent with your idea of what is just and
right to harbour a lasting resentment for an unpremeditated trespass.

If you judge me by appearances, Miss Jones, he replied, I may suffer in
your good opinion; but in absenting myself from Mrs. Jennings’s house I
conceive I only acted as every man of honour ought to act towards a
lady, who gave him clearly to understand that his visits were unwelcome.
You may not have been informed that the very first time I waited upon
you at Denbigh she intimated this to me most pointedly by letter, and
when a second time I was not suffered to deliver into your hands what I
had in charge to give you from my mother, judge if I could so
misunderstand either her or myself, as ever to intrude again, and
provoke her to give me a more explicit dismission.

Alas, sir, replied Amelia, how it came to pass, that Mrs. Jennings so
misjudged the case I know not; but that she is incapable of a designed
affront I am perfectly persuaded. You well know the situation, in which
we jointly stand towards the families of De Lancaster and Morgan, which
meet and centre in your single person; and I think you cannot fail to
find good reason on our part, why we should not wilfully fail in respect
towards those, upon whose bounty we subsist.

Ah lovely Amelia, exclaimed the enamoured youth, when you humble
yourself to speak of obligations to my family in these terms, you compel
me to declare to you, that I have no higher ambition at my heart, nor is
there any prouder honour I can aspire to, than to render myself in time
not totally unworthy of a place in your esteem: you must suffer me to
tell you, that such was the impression I received upon the sight of you,
when I was bearer of the token, which the poor soldier was entrusted
with, and so ardent was my desire to avail myself of the introduction,
which my departed mother’s commission for the second time afforded me,
that the unexpected cold reception I encountered from your governess was
such a cutting disappointment, that I could not conquer my ungovernable
temper, and was driven to commit a thousand wild extravagancies, that
upon reflection I am ashamed of: therefore it was, that upon
self-examination discovering my unworthiness, and want of education to
correct my errors, I avoided all society but of my teacher and my books,
and laboured diligently to retrieve the time, that I had lost. How far I
may have succeeded time must show: all I can say for myself is, that I
have not been sparing of my efforts, and if henceforward I may be
favoured with access to you, I shall have an object in my view, whose
approbation, if I can deserve it and obtain it, will be the highest
reward this world can give me, and the one great blessing of my life.

He had, whilst he was addressing her in these emphatic words, taken her
hand in his, and she now for sometime, without attempting to withdraw
it, sate silent, meditative, with her eyes fixt upon the ground, and her
face suffused with blushes.

The terms, in which she had heard herself addressed, were such as could
not be misunderstood; it is natural also to suppose they could not be
unwelcome: they certainly demanded an answer, but how to shape that
answer between the extremes of too much and too little sensibility was
to the modest, unassuming, diffident Amelia an embarassment that her
inexperience was not qualified to surmount. She had however made an
effort to attempt some general acknowledgments, better graced and easier
to be understood by the look and action that accompanied them than by
the language, when the sudden approach of Cecilia in an instant
dispelled both the pleasure and the pain of this unfinished explanation,
and gave her to understand that Mr. De Lancaster had something to impart
to her, and was anxiously expecting the pleasure of her company.

Upon the word she rose, bowed respectful obedience to the summons, and
turned a look upon the party, she was now constrained to leave, so
marked with feeling and so fraught with mind, that our hero must have
been dull indeed had he needed any comment to explain its meaning.




CHAPTER V.

_Our Heroine has an Interview with the Grandfather of our Hero._


When the young and lovely orphan, whom our history will no longer
overlook, was admitted to the presence of the venerable De Lancaster, no
third person being there but the lady who introduced her, she had so far
composed her spirits as to make her first approaches, and receive his
compliments, under no other agitation than what served to set off the
modest graces of her person and deportment to the best advantage: he led
her to a chair, and placed himself by her side. After a pause of some
short continuance, during which he had kept his eyes admiringly upon
her, he turned to Cecilia, and said--I see you were resolved I should
enjoy the pleasure of a surprise, for though you described in part what
I was to expect, your description was far short of the original. I have
seen my brother Morgan’s portrait of Miss Jones’s father, and I can
trace a likeness.

You would do that better, said Cecilia, in a miniature, which perhaps
Amelia has about her.

Amelia answered that she had not the miniature in her possession.

Let it pass, rejoined De Lancaster; we have matter of more moment to
discourse upon. You will understand, Miss Jones, that by the will of the
deceased lady, who had your interest so much at heart, you become
invested with a claim upon us of a twofold nature: the one portion of my
daughter-in-law’s bequest to you is easily satisfied, for it is set
down in the shape of a specific sum; the other and the greater portion,
being undefined, is an obligation, that can never be fairly said to
terminate so long as any thing shall remain undone on the part of my
grandson, which, according to his interpretation of his mother’s wishes,
may seem necessary for your honour and advantage to be further done.
John however is yet under age: on whom then, but on me, during his
minority, does that obligation in its full extent devolve? I acknowledge
it; I embrace it voluntarily; I will execute it religiously. You are my
charge; you are my child, and in trust for my grandson I receive you
into my adoption.

Amelia, half-rising from her seat, and pressing her claspt hands upon
her bosom, bowed her head and wept. De Lancaster proceeded.

How then am I to fulfil this duty. Surely not by deputy, not by
assignment: I must not suffer you to live at distance; you must
discharge yourself as speedily as may be from your residence at Denbigh.
Retain if you see fit, Mrs. Jennings as a friend attached to you, but
look to my Cecilia for those instructions, which are to regulate your
morals, and that example, which is to form your manners. Henceforward I
expect that you will regard Kray Castle as your proper home.

With this benevolent, but authoritative, invitation Mr. De Lancaster
concluded, when Cecilia, rightly conceiving, that a creature, young and
modest as Amelia, might find it difficult to suit her answer to a speech
and speaker of such a style and character, kindly interposed by asking
her in a familiar manner, whether she thought she could pass her time
as much to her content at Kray Castle as at Denbigh.

Ah madam, she replied, I have good reason to be contented with the way
in which I pass my time at Denbigh, but I trust I need not say how much
I feel the honour of being asked to Kray Castle, which of course would
be so high a treat to me. I must acknowledge to you notwithstanding,
that as I know of nothing, that can intitle me to the kindness you are
pleased to show me, I am fearful and alarmed, lest by stepping out of my
obscurity I should be suspected of conceiving myself to be any other
than what I really am, an orphan hitherto supported upon charity, and
now at once provided for in a way, that offers comforts, which my
parents did not possess, and affluence, which they had not to bequeath.

Here the good old man eagerly interposing, turned a kind approving smile
upon Amelia, and said--There is a grace, my good child, in humility,
which well befits your sex, your situation and your time of life; but
don’t be more humble than the descendant of a good and ancient family
ought to be; for the dignity of the stock is not to be degraded by the
eventual sterility of any one of the branches. When we invite you to
partake of the society of our family, you may be sure it is a pleasure,
that we are desirous to enjoy: If you therefore are pleased to consider
our solicitation as a civility, how much more cause have we to set down
your compliance as a favour? I must ever think, that when my guest
brings with him the recommendatory properties of good birth, good
manners, sense and morals, he brings with him into my company what does
me honour, let him be as bare of money as hard fate may make him. You
seem to think that your ambition should be bounded by the specific sum
bequeathed to you in the will of our newly-deceased friend, and rightly
you would think, had nothing else been devised by the testatrix; but as
this is not the case, and as the mother in her will lays further
commands upon the son, don’t suppose, because your moderation may
conceive that much is done, that he will think there is no more to do.

As Mr. De Lancaster was addressing these words to the fair and gentle
creature that was seated by his side, the person, to whom they alluded,
at that instant entered the room. There are lights favourable and
unfavourable, in which every human being will at different times be
seen; this was decidedly one of the happiest moments, which an artist
could have seized for modelling, or a sensitive young damsel for
contemplating, our hero John De Lancaster. As Amelia was rising from her
seat upon his entrance, the address, with which he hastened to replace
her, and the gracefulness of the action, which accomplished it, were in
the very best style of good breeding and politeness, as they were then
understood and practised: as they are now better understood and more
easily practised, no elegant lady would take the trouble to rise, and if
an awkward miss attempted it, no elegant gentleman would be at the pains
to prevent her; ease is the grand desideratum of modern life; and no
one makes a compliment of what every one helps himself to without
ceremony.

The Wilsons, father and son, now joined the company, and whilst they
drew off to the party of the senior De Lancaster, John took his seat
between Amelia and his aunt, being thereunto invited by the latter.

I have been soliciting Miss Jones to pass some time with us at the
castle, said Cecilia.

I am happy to hear it, John replied, and I hope you have prevailed. I
understand you go home to-morrow, and I must deny myself the
gratification of attending upon you, for I feel it indispensably
incumbent upon me to devote some few days to my grandfather Morgan, and
to sundry things, which he wishes to be done in consequence of the
mournful event, that brought us hither; of course so long as I can
afford any consolation to that good and generous heart, which pain and
sorrow conspire to oppress, I must wait till I am released, and in the
mean while pace the solitary yew-tree walk without the hope of again
enjoying that delightful vision, which I once most luckily chanced upon,
but was speedily deprived of. I presume Miss Jones will be of your party
to-morrow.

That must be at her option, Cecilia observed; there will be room in the
coach, as our worthy Colonel stays a few days longer with Mr. Morgan.
Then turning to Amelia, she took her hand, and with a smile, that seemed
prepared to welcome an excuse, said to her in a whisper--How do you
stand disposed, my dear? Will you go with my father and me to-morrow, or
wait a few days till Colonel Wilson and my nephew can attend upon you?

I should naturally be most happy to go when you do, madam, (said Amelia
blushing) but--

Aye, resumed Cecilia, you would like that best no doubt, but what, my
dear? Something stands in the way of it--you are not ready I dare
say--that is it; is it not?

Yes, madam, it is. I have nothing with me here: all my things are at
Denbigh; and I am persuaded Mrs. Jennings will expect me to go with her,
and there will be a good deal to do.

I am persuaded there will be a good deal, repeated Cecilia; about as
much to do, as will fill up your time till the coach shall return for
the colonel and this gentleman, if we could suppose he would prefer it
to his horse, which in fact would be to suppose he would do that which
he has never done yet: our coach and crawling cattle move too slow for
him.

Not in all cases, my dear aunt, believe me--Not in your case, for
instance, unless they were conveying me to you; then they would be slow
indeed--If they were conveying you with me, and were it possible that my
poor company could content you, they could not spin out time, so
pleasantly engaged, too long.

Upon my word, nephew John, that is a very handsome compliment; but you
are seated between two ladies, and I suspect, whilst you were saying it
to one, you intended it for the other.

Excuse me, madam, that was not the case: It would indeed have been
correctly true, had I ventured to have addressed it to the other lady;
but till I can gain her confidence by my conduct, I will not court her
good opinion by my compliments.

As he spake these words, Amelia, struck with the turn he had given to
Cecilia’s raillery, raised her bright eyes, and for the first time
fixing them without a blush steadily upon him, said with an energy, that
seemed to carry her beyond herself--You answer nobly, sir! My father
would have honoured you for that sentiment.

This said, she rose from her seat, and with her rose the company; the
venerable old butler having given notice that the hour was come, when,
according to family custom (then very generally honoured and observed)
they were called upon to offer up their praises and petitions to the
Author of their being, and Dispenser of their blessings.




CHAPTER VI.

_Mr. De Lancaster and Cecilia return to Kray Castle. An Explanation
takes place between Mrs. Jennings and our Hero John; they are
reconciled._


The next morning saw the equipage of De Lancaster bear away the father
and the daughter not with that speed, which the emblem of the expanded
wings might be construed to betoken, but reverently and deliberately
with that slow and easy motion, which neither hurried the passengers out
of their equilibrium, nor the well-fed cattle out of their accustomed
amble, which was specifically neither walk, trot nor stand-still, though
something seemingly allied to each. In fact the gentry of those days had
not found out the necessity of being in a hurry, when they had nothing
to do that called for expedition.

The numberless things, that Amelia had to do at Denbigh when she did not
wish to leave Glen-Morgan, unluckily occurred to Mrs. Jennings, when if
they had slipped her memory, the omission would have been most readily
forgiven; but that provident lady saw so many things needful for herself
and for her charge, that suit was instantly made for the chariot and
horses, and Mrs. Richards the house-keeper was requested to obtain that
order from her master. Mrs. Richards admitted the necessity of a visit
to Denbigh on the part of Mrs. Jennings, for she saw the pressing claims
of crapes and gauzes in their true and proper force, but having probably
discovered in the expressive features of the young Amelia, then standing
beside her, something that to her conception indicated disappointment,
she good-naturedly cried out--Don’t take this dear child from us, just
when she is beginning to get acquainted and make friends with the family
from Kray Castle.

Why surely, said Mrs. Jennings, you forget that the only lady of that
family is gone away this morning, and you would not I suppose think it
proper for Amelia to stay here without me.

I can’t see what should harm her if she did, the dame made answer. My
poor good master and the colonel have either lost their limbs, or lost
the use of limbs, and as for the young folks, when they are happy in
each other, and innocently so, I always think it is a thousand pities to
part them.

Ah Mrs. Richards, it would be a delightful task indeed, if I had only
to provide the means of making my Amelia happy; for her wishes are so
pure and so prudent, that she deserves to be gratified in them; but
circumstanced as she is, and limited as I am, there are many things,
innocent in themselves, that she must not risk, and many mere
appearances that she must avoid. I dare say her own good understanding
convinces her how necessary it often is to sacrifice what is pleasant
for the sake of what is prudent.

Oh yes; I’m perfectly convinced of that, Amelia said and drew a
sigh--Aye, cried the unconverted dame who pleaded on the side that
pleases best, just so would the poor lady, that we buried yesterday,
have said, and just so she did say; she was a slave to appearances; she
sacrificed every thing to what is called prudence, and only lived to be
a melancholy example how much happier and better she would have been
had she taken counsel of her own heart, and not of other people’s
heads--And thus having wound up her climax and her opinion in the same
moment the good dame with that significant jerk and toss of the head,
which is the veriest unequivocal and not to be mistaken stamp of
self-content, faced about and trotted off in quick time to a kind of
march, that to a musical ear would have marked a measure considerably
above _moderato_, and a firmness in the tread characteristic of one, who
walked by authority, and kept right onwards without check or turning.

I perceive, my dear Amelia, said Mrs. Jennings, that if I persist to do
what I consider to be my duty with respect to you, I shall have every
body’s voice against me; but, thank Heaven, you will soon be under the
protection of the lady of Kray Castle, and then my responsibility will
cease.

I trust, replied Amelia, you have not found me impatient to throw off
your government, and till that happens, I hope you will not dismiss me
from your care. Here the dialogue was interrupted by the coming in of
John De Lancaster and the Reverend Mr. Wilson. Mrs. Jennings immediately
availed herself of the opportunity for requesting a few minutes private
conversation with our hero, and, this being granted, she delivered
herself as follows--

I am sensible, Mr. De Lancaster, that I incurred your displeasure by the
manner, in which I received the honour of your visit, when you last
called upon me in Denbigh. Undoubtedly I ought to have presented Amelia
Jones to you without a moment’s hesitation, that you might have given
into her hands the invaluable relick, you had in charge for her. For
this omission I most heartily ask your pardon, and assure you that I had
no intention to offend, but erred in judgment, when in my over-care to
guard Amelia from the effect of any sudden agitation upon the opening of
that pacquet, I very unadvisedly took the delivery of it upon myself.

What you have already said, replied De Lancaster, is apology more than
sufficient for an oversight on your part, especially as it proceeded
from so considerate a motive; but I am afraid, Madam, my abrupt
departure is not so easily to be excused, and I can only say, that if we
are to exchange forgiveness, I shall have much to sue for, and very
little to bestow. However let me hope that Miss Jones has not been
molested by our misunderstanding, but has the miniature, and thinks it,
as it appeared to me, a very admirable painting.

Sir, resumed Mrs. Jennings, I am sorry to say that the error I
committed, in taking the delivery of the present out of your hands, has
very much molested Miss Jones; and the chief reason for my hastening to
Denbigh is, that I may restore to you the pacquet, which is still in my
keeping, in the hope, that you will condescend to fulfil your first
intention, and with your own hands bestow it upon her, who from her
respect for you and for the express conditions attached to your delivery
of it, has scrupulously denied herself even the pleasure of a sight of
it.

You surprize me and delight me, cried our hero in a tone of exultation.
’Tis an instance of so refined and delicate a sense of honour in the
young lady, whom you have educated, as recommends her to my warmest
veneration and esteem. Don’t let me lose an hour, that can be employed
for her relief, and as you tell me that you are hastening home, where
you have the pacquet in your keeping, I will mount my horse and be ready
at your door to hand you out of your carriage, and in your presence, if
such shall be your pleasure, make a transfer of the relick to the lovely
person, who is so properly intitled to it.

Ah sir, cried Mrs. Jennings, you are infinitely kind, and will not only
take a heavy load from off my heart, but give delight to that beloved
child, whose disappointment has been very great.

Say to her then, said John, that I am gone to make myself ready to
attend upon her, for I hear the chariot coming up to the door. Tell her
that it is to her I owe the conscious gratification of being able to say
with truth, I have never disobeyed any one command of my departed
mother, and say moreover that to save her from disappointment and guard
her from danger is another command delivered to me by the same
authority, and intitled to be treated with the same obedience.--But why
do I trouble you with this idle talk? Say nothing to your lovely charge
for me: What have I to do with professions? Let me earn her good opinion
by my actions--Farewell! Your chariot waits.




CHAPTER VII.

_Our Hero accompanies Amelia and Mrs. Jennings to Denbigh. Past Mistakes
are set to rights in a very natural and agreeable Manner._


The fine and valuable horse, which Sir Arthur Floyd and his friends had
so handsomely presented to young John De Lancaster, and in whose noble
veins ran the full blood of the mal-treated massacred Glendowr, was in
constant attendance upon our hero, wherever he went, and no other hero
was in the habit of riding him. When the ladies had set off for Denbigh,
this favourite animal was by John’s order led out to the great hall-door
for him to mount: The beauty of his form, the spirit of his eye and the
elegance of his action having drawn a party of admirers, male and
female about him, the poor old gouty grandfather at the instigation and
by the advice of Madam Richards, whose voice was as an oracle in Glen
Morgan, was wheeled into the hall and drawn out upon the landing-place
before the portal to see his grandson in the saddle. It was indeed a
spectacle well worth a lame man’s trouble to contemplate. The
consciousness, which the fine animal seemed to entertain of his own
dignity, and the sensibility with which he appeared to feel the caresses
of his master, were noticed by the grandfather, who had been a famous
sportsman in his time, and gave him great delight. John put his horse
into graceful action, bowed respectfully to the old gentleman and rode
off.

At about two miles distance from Denbigh he overtook the chariot. The
light and nimble tread of his horse upon the mossy turf gave no notice
of his approach: the ladies were engaged upon an interesting topick, and
his name was on the lips of Amelia in the very moment when he rode up to
the window, and, as it happened, on the side where she was seated: In
the sudden emotion, which the sight of him occasioned, the start she
gave, and the action that accompanied it, covered her with blushes; for
she was conscious of having betrayed more joy and transport on the
occasion than it is required of prudent young ladies to discover when
they meet young men of their acquaintance on the road. Her’s was not the
age however nor yet the nature, that could counterfeit tranquillity and
indifference; so that when her eyes were directed towards him, they gave
him clearly to perceive and know how welcome to her sight he was. He
himself also was too much enraptured with what he contemplated to be
either very able or very eager to help her out of her embarrassment; in
a short time however she had recollected herself quite sufficiently to
be extremely charmed with the beauty of his horse, extremely
apprehensive of his danger when he came too near, and extremely happy
when he came so very close to the window, that her fair hand could reach
not only to caress and fondle that fine animal, but to display its own
fair self to the owner of the animal, who, probably, was not so devoid
of common sense, and incapable of observation, as not to know pretty
nearly what proportion of those endearments were properly addressed to
the horse, what virtually bestowed upon himself.

Upon his arrival at Mrs. Jennings’s house, the reception which John now
met was very unlike what he had before experienced. The cases containing
the miniature picture and the gold chain were delivered to him. Mrs.
Jennings quitted the room, and upon his finding himself alone with
Amelia, he began as follows--

I confess to you, Miss Jones, I feel myself very highly gratified by the
handsome manner, in which you have declined taking this pledge of my
poor mother’s affection and regard for you, till I could have an
opportunity of delivering it into your hands agreeably to her particular
instruction and desire. I am sensible it is a refinement, that very many
people would not feel, but happily for me you did, and the melancholy
event, that has since occurred, naturally makes me the more desirous of
adhering strictly to what she gave me in command: this I now do, when I
have the honour of presenting to you, as a token of her very sincere
esteem, this miniature of your father; what the other case contains is
simply a chain, which I hope you will accept from me, though it has
neither the same intrinsic value as a relick, nor the same ideal value
as a memorial of the donor.

Pardon me, exclaimed Amelia, eagerly interposing, what the other case
contains is a gift not only very beautiful in itself, but infinitely
valuable to me for the giver’s sake.

Oh! that I might believe you, cried the enraptured youth.

Indeed you may, she naturally replied. I prize it as your gift above all
computation.

Nay, now, enchantress, he exclaimed, if your beauty and your kindness
overcome my reason, you must either pardon my transports, or escape out
of my company. To be told that you will prize this trifle, because it is
my gift, is such a favour as can only be repaid by tendering to you my
heart--my life--myself--my every thing--and, saying this, he pressed the
unreluctant damsel to his bosom, accompanying each fond endearing phrase
with tender but respectful delicate caresses.

As soon as he had released her from his arms he led her to a chair, kept
her hand in his, and seated himself by her: she was not in the least
abashed, did not betray any extraordinary agitation, nor studied to
avoid his eyes; for real purity is not suspicious--Amelia, he cried, I
know the sacred nature of the responsibility I have incurred by giving
way to the raptures, which your charms inspired. Your father’s picture
hangs before me; I well remember the apostrophe I made to it; you do not
want the presence of Mrs. Jennings to guarantee my good behaviour; your
very best duenna is my honour. That mother, who is scarcely cold in her
shrowd, with her dying breath bequeathed you to my honour, my protection
and my constant care through life. These are my duties; they are such as
a brother, as a guardian or a father might engage in: I don’t commence
my execution of them after the way of either of these, but, availing
myself of the first favourable opportunity, and snatching at the first
kind expression, which your politeness prompts you to address to me, I
instantly throw my unprivileged arms about your chaste and beauteous
person with all the ardour of a lover--All this is true: I felt that
ardour, and I feel that love--Let me now ask you, Does the declaration
of that love offend you?

Oh, no, no, no.

And may I hope in time to merit a return of love?

You merit it already, and you have it--But hold! restrain yourself.
Don’t make it such a wonder that I speak the truth; but as I have
answered fairly, hear me now in my turn, calmly, patiently, I pray you;
for I verily believe, that upon the candour, with which you shall treat
the sincere confession and appeal I am now about to make to you, the
happiness of my life in future will depend.

Speak freely; I am all attention. I will not deceive you.

What I have said is true: I have full cause to love you: such as you are
in every early excellence of mind and person, it would be out of nature
if I did not. I can well believe it to be against rule for a young girl
like me to make this frank confession: It seems so; and perhaps it was
not quite in rule for me to suffer you to embrace me, whilst you uttered
those emphatic, tender words; I could not help it: you embraced me once
before; I could not help it then. The arms of no man since my father
died ever embraced me, yours alone excepted. The delight, which those
endearments gave me in both cases, I am not ashamed to own; for it was
pure: but I should be sorry to indulge in that delight, however pure,
which cannot be permanent; and would not wish to hear those fond
rapturous words repeated, to which if I affixed a serious meaning, I
must be the vainest and the weakest of all human beings. In one word, my
dear sir, you, who are destined to so high a lot, must show some pity
for a lowly creature that looks up to you with love and admiration, and
must absolutely promise me to fill up your time at Glen Morgan, whilst I
in obedience to Mr. De Lancaster’s commands pay a short visit of respect
at Kray Castle.

If you think that I ought to be at Glen Morgan when you are at Kray
Castle, John replied, I much doubt if I ought to be where I am at this
moment; but why my lovely Amelia should mistrust either her own power,
or my principle, I cannot tell.

You must not disappoint the expectation of your friends; you must not do
what is unbecoming of your situation.

That’s true, my sweet Amelia; that is very true: I must not disgrace
myself by any mean and infamous action: you would not like me if I did
that; would you, Amelia?

Surely not.

I must not, for instance, make vehement protestations to an ingenuous,
honourable, accomplished girl, draw her on to confess that I am not
disagreeable to her, prevail upon her to endure my hypocritical
caresses, and then turn my back upon her, and forsake her; would not
that be scandalous?

It would not be right.

It would be rascally: for suppose I was to say to her thus--because I
abound in money myself, I won’t marry you unless you abound also; what
sort of a reason would that be? Or again, because I am a plain
gentleman, and you are quite as well born as myself, in short, in every
respect my equal, therefore I must seek for something higher--_I must
not disappoint the expectation of my friends; I must not do what is
unbecoming of my situation_--How would that sound? What kind of opinion
would you form of a man, who should act and argue in that way? You would
despise him, Amelia; you would say to him in earnest what you say to me
in jest--Don’t let us meet, if it be possible to avoid it: should I come
to visit your family, take care not to be at home--Ah Amelia, Amelia, if
so you wished to have disposed of me, why did not you contrive to make
your visit to Kray Castle, as my aunt proposed to you, when you knew I
could not be there?

Nay, that is not a fair question, she replied: why do I think these
minutes happier than any I have passed, since last we met in this room
together?--Here the conversation no longer turned upon interrogatories:
it was not of the nature of argumentation or discussion; it would elude
short-hand; for the pauses, when no words were interchanged, were
employed in contemplating the miniature, affixing it to the chain, and
adjusting it to the pearly neck of the fair possessor, which, with other
businesses of not less moment, occupied the thoughts of the parties,
till Mrs. Jennings made her entrance, and announced to John De Lancaster
that a young man, who called himself the son of Ap Rees, the minstrel of
Penruth, was waiting and extremely urgent to be admitted; a wish, that
was immediately complied with.

The agony of the young man’s mind was visible in his countenance. It
was with some difficulty that our hero recognized him; but in the same
moment that he recalled him to his memory, he received him in the
kindest manner, put him at his ease and made him sit down--I saw you
ride into town, said the poor fellow, and I traced you to this house: I
was a long time doubtful about venturing to ask for you; but you have an
excellent character for kindness and benevolence to your inferiors, and
the story of the poor soldier, who died in your house, encouraged me to
believe, that the pity you bestowed upon a traveller and a stranger, you
would not withhold from an ancient Briton and a neighbour: Besides, sir,
I remember when my father Robin Ap Rees performed at Kray Castle, and
sister and I came upon the platform in the great hall with him--Yes,
sure enough, I remember how good you was to my poor Nancy, when shame
overcame her, and she was like to faint--Ah, sir, worse shame has
overcome her now: the direst villain breathing has undone her: she is
crazed; she has attempted her own life; she is dying: that Jew David
Owen is her murderer: but I’ll follow him through the world; he is out
of the law’s reach, but not out of mine: as soon as I have laid poor
Nancy in her grave, I’ll after him across the seas, and when, or
wheresoever I can light upon him, that moment shall be his last.

Stop, friend, said John De Lancaster, you let your passion run away with
you, and don’t know what you are saying. I can guess the injury, that
has been done to your sister, but what are the facts, that so
particularly criminate Sir David Owen? Recite them simply, if you
please; give me nothing but the truth exactly stated; no invective, Mr.
Ap Rees, no aggravation.

Why, you must know, sir, said the appellant, that after the old
baronet’s death father wished for Nancy to go out to service; so there
came a lady to the Abbey to visit Sir David, or Sir David’s mother, I
can’t say which: she seemed to be mightily taken with Nancy, and being a
single lady hired her to be about her person, promising to educate and
take care of her. She seemed a motherly kind of person, sure enough, and
very affable. So when the lady’s own chariot drove up to the door, and
Nancy was told to step into it with her mistress, father thought, and so
did I, that it was a famous thing for his daughter--Alas, a-day! There
is no looking into people’s hearts. Little did we think, that it was
all a deep-laid plot to ruin a poor Innocent.

Proceed with your narrative, John repeated, and don’t digress into
comments and remarks, that, if you want my assistance, only prevent me
from tendering it to you by taking up my time unprofitably, and puzzling
my understanding.

I ask your pardon, sir, Ap Rees replied; I should have gone on to say,
that after two days travelling my sister was set down at a lone cottage,
where she believed herself at a considerable distance from the Abbey,
when in fact the tour she had taken was projected purposely to deceive
her into that persuasion. After a few days passed in perfect solitude
Sir David Owen appeared as a visitor to the lady of the cottage, when
by their joint contrivances, too horrible to relate, they first
succeeded in depriving my unhappy sister of her reason, and then
accomplished their infernal triumph over her innocence. In this state of
mental derangement she was kept for some time, not totally devoid of
short intervals of recollection, in one of which she thinks she saw you,
sir; but probably it was only her fancy, for there is no road, that
could have led you to the house.

I have reason to believe she is not mistaken, John replied! but no
matter. I can now anticipate in some degree the tragic end of your
afflicting narrative. Sir David Owen has left the kingdom, and made no
provision for your sister’s comfort--she is destitute, distracted,
dying--your father is old, blind and broken-hearted, and you are young,
torn with rage, burning for revenge, and perhaps not in a capacity to
furnish those medical and immediate aids, which the pitiable situation
of your suffering sister unintermittingly demands. I take all that upon
myself: I’ll do it instantly without delay: The victim of man’s villainy
shall not want a friend. Nancy Ap Rees, the blushing Innocent, whom I
supported in my arms, and was insulted for my officiousness, shall now,
in the last stage of her distress, and to the last moment of her life,
find my unqualified and full support: therefore lead me to her directly
wheresoever she is--If in town, let us hasten to her on foot; if out of
town, I have horses ready for myself and you--set out at once!




CHAPTER VIII.

_Our Hero visits the Daughter of Robin Ap Rees in her Distress._


As our hero was following Ap Rees to the street door of Mrs. Jennings’s
house, Amelia met him in the passage. I am going with this young man, he
said, upon a matter of business, that may keep me some time--but why are
you alarmed, Amelia? there is no cause for it, I assure you: I only go
to serve a friend--I am satisfied, she replied, I ask no questions;
farewell!

In a poor little tenement, the habitation of a widow-woman, in the
outskirts of the town, young Robin Ap Rees had a lodging room, and in
that room there was a bed, wherein our benevolent young hero
horror-struck beheld an emaciated delirious creature, bound down with
straps; the ruin of a beauteous form; the wreck, which villainy had made
of reason; a modest unsoiled maiden once, whose purity nothing but
poisonous drugs could overthrow; a spectacle to rend the heart of man,
and make an angel weep.

I cannot stand it, John exclaimed. Open the window: give me air, or I
shall sink outright.

A voice was heard, that in a feeble but shrill tone murmured out--I know
you--John had turned away from what he could not bear to look upon; he
now again directed his eyes towards the object, that addressed him, and
burst into an agony of tears.

Can man do this and live, he cried; can Heaven see this, and spare him?

I wish they would not tie me down, the poor creature said. I will be
very quiet, whilst you are with me.

Release her, he exclaimed: she has not strength to hurt herself--They
obeyed him instantly; the brother and the poor woman of the house set
her free: she smiled upon them, and bowed her head in acknowledgment for
the favour. There, there, said John, you see the terror of her looks
subsides: I now discern an emanation of her former self. Nancy, my girl,
compose yourself; be comforted! you say you know me: I am John De
Lancaster, and come to comfort you, to clear your character, to restore
you (with God’s leave) to health and happiness, and to sooth the sorrows
of your father, whom you shall shortly see: again I say, compose
yourself. I am your friend, and will not desert you, nor suffer you to
be ill treated any longer.

God will reward you, she said: God knows my injuries; your generous
nature would be shocked to hear them. If I may see my father and receive
his blessing, I will die content.

You shall see your father: I will send for him directly.

Thank you! ’tis kind in you. I saw you ride by on your horse: I called
after you, but you did not hear me. I am sure they did something to
disorder my brain; it is not possible I could have devised such
sinfulness else; no, no, it is not possible.

Doctor Roberts, (locally so intitled) now entered the chamber; he came
opportunely, for the unhealed gashes on poor Nancy’s arms were bleeding
afresh, and required the skill of a surgeon to stop them. The county of
Denbigh, not then extremely fertile in men of medical celebrity,
decidedly conferred the palm of pre-eminence on Doctor Roberts, and, in
addition to the character of ability in his profession, he had, and
merited to have, universal credit for benevolence and humanity: not to
the diseased alone, but also to the distressed, his help was ready, and
his hand was open.

He had attended on this piteous object at the suit of her unhappy
brother; he had staunched the bleeding of her self-inflicted wounds, and
had found it necessary to prescribe coercion, and to tie down her hands.
An idea that her blood was poisoned had impressed her with the
persuasion that to let it out was an act of duty, and the instant that
she found her hands at liberty, she employed them in that office. The
Doctor now stopped the bleeding, and provided against a repetition of
it. When this was done, he attended to the anxious enquiries of John De
Lancaster, with whose character and connections he was perfectly well
acquainted. It was his opinion that the patient could not survive above
two days: her pulse indicated approaching dissolution; nature was
exhausted; the whole mass of her blood was broken; in fact it was
absolutely poisoned by the inordinate infusion of pernicious stimulants,
which had been insidiously administered in her diet and her drink for
the most abominable purposes: of this he was convinced not only by her
own evidence, but by symptomatic proofs, in which he could not be
mistaken; in short he was certain, that when her death took place a jury
of surgeons upon opening the body would confirm the fact, and this of
course he recommended as a measure due to justice.

With the same view he advised that her deposition should be taken
without loss of time in a legal manner, which he believed her competent
to give, especially now that the loss of blood had cleared her
intellect, though at the same time it might conspire to hasten her
dissolution.

In conformity to this advice measures were immediately taken, and David
Williams was dispatched to Kray Castle with the following letter from
John to his grand-father.

             “Most dear and honoured sir,

     “I have been present at a scene of the most afflicting nature:
     Nancy Ap Rees, the daughter of blind Robin, is dying in consequence
     of practices too horrible to be described, that have been employed
     against her for purposes the most diabolical. When you call to mind
     the wretch, who has lately disappeared, it will spare me the pain
     of committing his detestable name to the same paper, that is graced
     with your’s, and signed with mine.

     “Alas, my beloved grand-father, how deeply do I regret that it
     should have been my lot so early in life, and for so long a portion
     of it, to have been in any degree implicated with a miscreant, who,
     after being convicted of the most disgraceful and unmanly conduct
     in various instances, has by gradations in cruelty proceeded to the
     extreme of all atrocity, and effected the violation of an innocent
     and virtuous girl by means, that amount, as I conceive, to actual
     murder.

     “As the brother of this unhappy victim now on her death-bed, and by
     intervals only possessed of her reason, has resorted to me in his
     distress, how could I, a descendant of the De Lancasters and
     grandson of the best and most benevolent of mankind, have been
     worthy of my name, had I shrunk from the duties of humanity,
     however irksome it may be to me, that any part of the trouble,
     which ought to be all my own, should devolve upon you, without whom
     I am nothing.

     “The first thing I require of you is to send me over money, fully
     sufficient to satisfy in a liberal manner all incidental expences
     attending the care of this poor creature, whilst she has life; to
     provide for the interment of her remains after death, and the
     effectual prosecution of the wretch, and his accomplice or
     accomplices, who to the crime of violation have added that of
     poisoning her pure blood with drugs of the most inflammatory and
     deadly nature.

     “By my servant David Williams, who is the bearer of this, you will
     immediately send me over one hundred pounds, and as the presence of
     old Robin Ap Rees is earnestly expected by his dying child, you
     will be pleased to give order for his safe and speedy conveyance
     under care of some one of your household, who will prudently
     prepare him for the meeting, happy in this one instance, that his
     sight at least cannot be shocked by the sad and piteous spectacle,
     that would else have awaited him.

     “With these requisitions convinced that your benignant candour will
     comply, I remain with all true devotion, &c. &c.

                                         “JOHN DE LANCASTER.”

Whilst John withdrew to write this letter Doctor Roberts had been
wholly occupied in his endeavours to keep life in his patient, who by
successive faintings now sunk so fast, that De Lancaster only came back
in time to see her eyes close for ever.

It was now so evident that the deceased had by her own act brought on
immediate dissolution, that it became a doubt with Doctor Roberts,
whether any satisfactory proofs could be adduced of her having died
precisely by poisonous drugs, inasmuch as it was not possible for him to
depose upon oath, though in opinion he was persuaded, that it was not in
the power of medicine to have saved her, had she abstained from all
self-violence.

Of the particular means used for the imposing those pernicious drugs
upon her there was no such specification, as could be producible
evidence in a court of justice; for no words had been taken down from
the mouth of the deceased, and the fact of her insanity being
incontrovertible, very little credit would be legally attached to the
wanderings of a suicide, known to have been deprived of her reason: it
was therefore judged advisable to waive the process, that had been in
meditation, and not expose her miserable remains to an operation, which
even John revolted from, whilst her brother in the most earnest manner
besought them to dispense with it.

In these resolutions and opinions the debating parties were the more
confirmed by the following letter, which young Williams brought with him
on his return from Kray Castle--

“Your conduct, my beloved grandson, has my unqualified approbation, and
your commands are punctually fulfilled. David Williams brings the sum
you call for, and Ben my groom, a discreet and steady man, has
instructions for the safe conveyance of Robin Ap Rees from Penruth Abbey
to you at Denbigh.

“I am no lawyer, but it is clear to me, that if the drugs, which have
been given with evil intent, can be proved to have been the actual, sole
and immediate cause of death, it is a positive murder: if on the
contrary it be true, as stated by your messenger, that the poor
distracted creature was driven by desperation to the fatal act of
opening her own veins, the case becomes more than doubtful, provided it
shall turn out upon evidence, that her death has been accelerated
thereby; for who is to say that life is not to be saved, though a
physician may despair of it? Neither is it to be supposed, that the mild
spirit of our laws will be so interpreted by judge and jury upon a trial
for life, that out of two possible constructions that in preference
shall be proceeded upon, which bears hardest against the prisoner at the
bar.

“I would have you therefore be extremely guarded in your investigation
of this intricate and complicated case, and take especial care to give
no handle to a censorious world to insinuate that you are actuated by a
prejudiced and hostile mind in consequence of what has passed between
you and the person, upon whom the charge will bear, if it is seriously
brought forward: recollect withal that the _good Samaritan_ contented
himself with relieving the man, who had fallen amongst thieves, but did
not busy himself either in the pursuit, or use means for the detection
of them.

“I am entirely with you in your just abhorrence of those direful
practices, that have effected the ruin, and probably the death, of the
much-injured object, in whose cause you honourably stand forth; but
temper your benevolence with caution, and remember that on your life
depends all that is valuable in this world to

CENTER
“Your affectionate
“ROBERT DE LANCASTER.”




CHAPTER IX.


_Proceedings at Denbigh in consequence of the Death of Ap Rees’s
Daughter. Our Hero retires to Glen Morgan. The Address of the blind
Minstrel of Penruth to the People concludes the Volume._


Upon the arrival of old Robin Ap Rees in the forenoon of the day
succeeding that, in which his daughter died, he required to be led to
the chamber, where her corpse was laid out. There had been some stir in
the town about the manner of her death, for the story had in part got
abroad, and the name of Sir David Owen began to be circulated with such
comments, as seemed to indicate a propensity in the town’s-folk to take
the cause into their own hands, and administer tumultuous justice in
their own mob-way.

This was by all means to be avoided, and when it was understood that old
Robin meant to be present at the funeral of his daughter, it was judged
highly expedient that he should be cautioned and prevailed upon to
employ his influence for the purpose not of aggravating, but allaying,
the dangerous indignation of the inhabitants; for Robin Ap Rees was a
popular character, and not meanly endowed with that species of
eloquence, which is competent to disturb or to preserve the peace of the
community.

It was also thought advisable, that our hero John De Lancaster, whose
good deeds every tongue had trumpeted, should withdraw himself from the
spot, where commotion was apprehended: this without difficulty he was
persuaded to do; his grandfather’s letter favouring that measure: he
accordingly set out with Mrs. Jennings and Amelia for Glen Morgan,
having committed every thing, in which he had concern, to the conduct
and discretion of his excellent friend and preceptor Mr. Wilson, who had
come over most opportunely for all parties on this critical occasion.

Whilst all affairs, that prudence could provide for, were going on at
Denbigh under the management of the wise divine and worthy doctor, John
in the retired and shady walks of Glen Morgan was enjoying the society
of his beloved Amelia, and listening to the praises she bestowed upon
him.

I could wish, he said to her as they were sauntering under the
yew-trees, that you would not be so ingenious in describing actions
better than they are: they can only be appreciated according to the
worthiness of the motives, that have inspired them. You will allow, that
where money is laid out without inconvenience or regret, pecuniary
donations require but little effort, and of course imply but little
merit. If I give so secretly that no one can discover me, it is plain I
take a secret pleasure in the act of giving; but if I know that my
munificence, or my active services, can purchase the approbation of an
angel, that will bless and praise me for the deed, what does it prove
but that I have been industrious to obtain a reward, that is worthy of
my pains, and can only claim the credit of having found out something,
that is better than money, and more gratifying than indolence? How then
can you be perfectly assured that I did not exert myself in the case of
poor Nancy Ap Rees from the desire, which I must naturally have, of
recommending myself to you?

Whilst conversation of this sort was carried on in shady walks and
groves propitious to the cause of love, the seniors of the family, lame
Morgan and lame Wilson, who mustered only one effective leg between
them, kept house, and whil’d away the lagging hours partly in talk, and
partly in such humble resources as human nature is fain to resort to,
when age and decrepitude conspire to narrow our enjoyments, and,
shutting out all hope of future pleasure, confine us to the recollection
only of the past.

When you and I, said Morgan, were as young as my grandson John, I am
afraid, friend Wilson, we were neither of us altogether as worthy or as
wise. I can answer for one; and when our acquaintance commenced as
brother ensigns in Barrel’s regiment, I doubt we were not quite such
sturdy champions in the cause of virtue, as he now is, or as we ought
then to have been. I recollect when you turned out for me as second in
my affair with Cornet Flanagan, it was a foolish quarrel for a very
worthless cause; but no matter! those days are over and we are now old
fellows. You held on in the army, performed honourable service, received
honourable wounds and are at length laid up with an honourable, though
in my opinion not a very adequate, compensation: I quitted upon the
peace; came into possession of an ample property, led an idle, useless
and luxurious life, made my neighbours welcome, and kept the bottle
moving till the gout laid hold of me, and I could not move myself. What
a sorry figure in the calendar of antient British worthies shall I make?
A mere man of straw, without one ear of corn, save only a few grains of
good will in a bye-corner of my heart for an old friend like you, and
perhaps here and there for another of like honest nature with
yourself.--And now, Wilson, listen to me.--When I talk of my affairs my
steward has just now satisfied me, that I am confoundedly given to
involuntary lying; for I am considerably richer than I have believed or
represented myself to be.--John will have my land and house and all that
he can find about it, but, by the L--d, I won’t leave him a shilling of
my ready money. He won’t want it and others will--You for instance: you
have a son in the army, a son in the church, and I know you don’t
abound: you have a small invalided government, and a small patrimonial
lot of barren land--What then? I have left you a bit of money in my
will: ’tis true I shan’t keep it from you long at all events, for I am
brushing off after my poor daughter: give me the pleasure, brother
soldier, before I die, of telling me in what way a moderate sum can be
of service to you.

The tear that stood on Wilson’s manly cheek when it became his turn to
make reply, witnessed his grateful feelings for the good old man--Live
only, my dear sir, he said, live and be happy as your benevolence can
make you; I ask no more, and nothing can I receive beyond the sincere
gratification it now affords me to find myself thus honoured in your
friendship, and assured of your esteem.

Well, well! I know you for a sturdy soldier, the old gentleman replied;
so take your course: ’tis not the first time you have served me thus.
Perhaps ’tis natural to a mind like your’s to find that kind of
arrogance in money, which establishes a sort of patronage in the giver,
not quite consistent with your sense of independant friendship; and if
such be your construction of the case, wait, my good fellow, till the
time shall come, when I can have no use for what I bestow, and you no
longer any motive for declining to receive it--

    Death shall soon furnish that conclusive plea,
    Which ends the contest betwixt you and me.

Whilst time passed in this manner at Glen Morgan the interment of poor
Nancy Ap Rees, as regulated by the Reverend Mr. Wilson, took place at
Denbigh. A great concourse of people assembled; the whole corps of
harpers from all the neighbouring parts attended in honour of their
illustrious compatriot, and formed themselves in his train as he
followed the bearers of the coffin, led by his son. The minstrels of
Kray Castle and Glen Morgan, in their professional habits, and
distinguishable by the attributes of their respective patrons, both men
of eminence in their art and favourites of the muse, were present and
attracted general notice and respect.

As it was known that the venerable father of the deceased purposed to
speak to the people after the solemn service was concluded, the body was
no sooner committed to the earth than the crowd formed themselves into a
circle, of which he became the centre, and, having passed the word for
silence, heard themselves addressed, as follows.

Friends and my countrymen!--A dark old man, whose eyes no ray of light
hath visited these threescore years, stands here beside the grave of his
new-buried child, and wishes you to hear with patience a few plain and
pacifying words, to which, amidst the sorrows of his heart, he feels
himself in conscience bound to pray you for your own sakes to attend.

My station in the family of the deceased Sir Owen Ap Owen is well known
to all: from my youth up I have fulfilled the duties of his household
minstrel, and though it becomes me to speak modestly of my services, let
me hope they have been such, as do not disgrace the patronage of that
worthy master and his ancient venerable house. In the course of my
servitude having taken to wife a daughter of the celebrated Owen Gwynn,
whose name yet lives amongst us, I became the father of two children,
the elder of whom, a son, stands now at my side, the sharer of my
sorrows and the staff of my declining age: the younger, a daughter dear
to my sad heart as the blood that visits it, lies low at my feet in the
narrow chamber, whither we must all repair.

Friends, I beseech you, move me not to unfold the dreadful dealings,
that conspired the death of this most innocent and much injured child.
Be satisfied to know her wrongs are not within the reach of human
justice; God will avenge them; God will not permit the violator to
escape unpunished. Why should I name him? he is not of us; he was not
born of unmixed British blood! he is gone, self-banished, fled, and
never will he dare to return amongst us, and abide the perilous
inquisition, that awaits him.

Be patient therefore, my dear countrymen! stir not a hand in my redress,
and reverence the tombs of Penruth Abbey, where sleep the fathers and
the heroes of your ancient race: account yourselves rather so far
fortunate as you are henceforth rescued from a wretch without humanity,
an alien to your nation, one who respects no laws divine or human, so
void of honour, so abandoned of all virtue, so surrendered to all
villainy, that, when the purity of my child repulsed his guilty passion,
he scrupled not to make her mind a ruin, and levelled the defences of
her reason in order to accomplish the destruction of her innocence--And
now, my friends, you, who are fathers, will dismiss your fears; he, that
has destroyed my peace, cannot harm you--_My_ daughter dies, that
_your’s_ may be in safety.

Here I should end, for he, of whom you all expect to hear, seeks not the
praise of men, and modestly requires me to conceal the wondrous
bounties, he has heaped upon me: but I cannot obey him; I will speak his
praise, and in the ears of this assembly declare aloud, that to the
charity of John, the young De Lancaster, sole heir of his paternal and
maternal houses, I owe as much as man can owe to man--a grave for my
child, a patron for my cause and an asylum for my age--Heaven’s best of
blessings light upon his heart!--I have said.”


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

Harding and Wright, Printers, St. John’s Square.


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

it to be stoped=> it to be stopped {pg 13}

and Mrs. De Lancastar=> and Mrs. De Lancaster {pg 15}

that I coudn’t get=> that I couldn’t get {pg 97}

these addresed him=> these addressed him {pg 118}

you are two subtle=> you are too subtle {pg 123}

advisable to wave the=> advisable to waive the {pg 275}

all villiany=> all villainy {pg 291}




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER: A NOVEL; VOL. II ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of John de Lancaster: a novel; vol. III
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: John de Lancaster: a novel; vol. III


Author: Richard Cumberland

Release date: September 27, 2022 [eBook #69057]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Lackington, Allen, and Co, 1809

Credits: Sonya Schermann, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER: A NOVEL; VOL. III ***





                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.

                              VOLUME III.




                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.

                               A NOVEL.

                                  BY

                      _RICHARD CUMBERLAND, ESQ._

                           IN THREE VOLUMES.

                               VOL. III.

                               _LONDON_:

                PRINTED FOR LACKINGTON, ALLEN, AND CO.

                         TEMPLE OF THE MUSES,

                           FINSBURY-SQUARE.

                                 1809.




           Harding and Wright, Printers, St. John’s Square.




                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.




                            BOOK THE FIRST.




CHAPTER I.

_The Arrival of the Party from Glen Morgan at Kray Castle._


In the morning of the day after that, in which the miserable remains of
old Ap Rees’s hapless daughter were interred, the whole party under
orders of march for Kray Castle took their leave of Glen Morgan; the
Wilsons, father and son, with Amelia and Mrs. Jennings, in the coach,
and John, as usual, on his favourite horse; the equipage of Mr. De
Lancaster, properly attended, having arrived the day before.

An apartment, commanding a very beautiful prospect, had been made ready
for Amelia, by the order and under the inspection of the presiding lady
of the castle, who with the taste and elegance natural to her had fitted
it with every thing, that could be devised for the use, ornament or
amusement of the fair visitor, who was destined to take possession of
it. In a very handsome dressing-room adjoining to the bed-chamber, and
communicating by a flight of steps with a flower-garden in high
cultivation, Cecilia had provided a selection of well-chosen books, nor
was music overlooked in the catalogue of accommodations there collected
and displayed. A young woman, daughter of an old domestic, and perfectly
qualified to wait upon the person of a lady, was instructed to consider
herself as specially and exclusively attached to the service of Miss
Jones.

When the turret-bell gave the signal of an arrival, the servants of the
castle arranged themselves in the hall, nor was the harp silent upon the
entrance of our hero, conducting the fair stranger through their
respectful files to the saloon, where Cecilia received them. After they
had reposed themselves for a few minutes Mr. De Lancaster entered, and
with a gracious smile made his cordial salutations to each in turn,
reserving his embrace for John, last, but not least in his favour.

When I see my family circle, he said, thus recruited by the return of my
former inmates, and graced with the accession of my new ones, I
experience a pleasurable conviction, that so long as Providence shall
indulge me with a capacity to enjoy these blessings, I should be, and I
am, devoutly thankful, although one member of our community has been
lately lost, and in the instance of the other, who is absent, I am
totally disappointed and defeated of all hope. To you, John De
Lancaster, my grandson, in whom I glory, I render thanks for the honour
you have conferred upon my name and family by your noble conduct in the
melancholy case of old Ap Rees’s daughter; and I am particularly
pleased, that your generous feelings for the injured did not betray you
into angry and intemperate personalities against the worthless wretch,
whom Heaven, not you, must call to his account. In his melancholy fate
we see an instance of the impolicy as well as the impiety of setting all
regard to character at defiance. The evil spirit hath not so
established his authority upon earth, that men will risque to be the
friends of him, who dares to be the foe of virtue. Innocence will not be
violated, nor justice braved and insulted with impunity. Where is there
one amongst all the favourites of fortune, to whom more happy
opportunities and brighter hopes of prosperity have been vouchsafed,
than to that young man, who is now become the object of our aversion and
contempt? What might he not have been? Alas, what is he now?

I should be at a loss, said the elder Wilson, to answer that question,
because I could not find words in the language to express his crimes:
but murder of the blackest cast is amongst them, so that methinks is one
item, which has a pretty good right to cry out in the catalogue. Were I
on his court-martial, I would hang him without mercy, and I think I
could almost find in my heart to be present at his execution.

Not you, not you, said Cecilia in an under-tone, and laid her gentle and
reproving hand upon his shoulder.

She is right, resumed De Lancaster; she knows you better than you know
yourself. I am persuaded you are no otherwise a friend to punishment but
as it tends to reformation; that is not the property of hanging. The
poor Irish criminal, who before he was turned off ingenuously declared
it should be a warning to him in future, materially mistook his own
case. Excision is no cure: I much doubt, if that dreadful process ought
to be resorted to in any instance.

Surely not, the colonel observed, except to save the body’s health:
with that view I myself submitted to the amputation of a limb.

Secure the community, De Lancaster rejoined, against further danger from
the obnoxious member, and let no man’s extinguishing decree deprive his
guilty fellow creature of a chance for repentance and atonement. Here,
if I mistake not, we may let the question rest, and relieve the ladies
present from a painful disquisition.

Upon John’s enquiring of his aunt, if she had any news of his father,
she informed him she had received a large pacquet, which was not
producible except in private; and in truth it was a journal, which not
only on account of its prolixity, but of its absurdity also, requires a
separate and exclusive chapter.




CHAPTER II.

_The Journal of Mr. Philip De Lancaster._


INDD
“Dear Sister!”

“When I arrived at Milford Haven I found a vessel bound to Liverpool, of
which I availed myself for a passage, as travelling in rough roads is
extremely troublesome. The master of the vessel was a very affable and
entertaining gentleman, and having been three times on a slaving voyage
to the coast of Africa, had acquired a perfect knowledge both of men and
manners.

“When we dropped anchor at Liverpool, the crowd and hurry on the quay
appeared to me to be such, that I held it best to keep quiet in the
cabin of the brig, that brought me thither. Being in no capacity for
making enquiries in my own person about a passage to the South of
France, I did not like to manifest to my friendly captain a desire to
quit his company, which had become so agreeable to me; I thereupon came
to a determination of taking my chance with him, and when I understood
his destination to be for the fourth time to the coast of Africa, I
considered that one warm climate was like another, and warmth being what
I was in search of for Mrs. De Lancaster, he assured me that I should
find it there in perfection; this being ascertained I engaged for the
voyage, avoiding thereby all further trouble either to myself or him
about a matter of such absolute indifference.

“It cost some time to ship the cargo he was taking out with him, and
gave me some annoyance whilst his crew were stowing it, as they are in
the habit of accompanying their work with certain noises, far from
melodious, and intelligible only to themselves. I had however a faculty
of sleeping pretty generally through it all, which made time, heavy at
the best, pass off very tolerably, till we set sail and took leave of
land and all its troublesome concerns. I understood from the people that
went on shore, that the town of Liverpool would have been highly worth
my seeing, and I have every reason to believe their information was
correct.

“We commenced our voyage in pleasant weather; the captain’s conversation
was on many points entirely new and very edifying on that account. He
kept a liberal table, particularly in the article of salt-fish, of which
he had a considerable cargo on board; but when he had no longer a
supply of eggs to recommend his salt-fish, I must confess I was
sometimes puzzled how to make a dinner, especially as his soup had a
taste, to which I had not as yet familiarized my palate.

“During our passage through the Bay of Biscay I perceived the vessel to
have considerable motion, but there is a lulling property in the
vacillation of a hammock, that promotes repose.

“One day, when I was told we were off the coast of Portugal, and I began
to inhale odours from the shore, that were infinitely preferable to
those of the salt-fish in the ship, I had a curiosity for the first time
to visit the accommodations below, when I was tempted to ask my friend
the captain for what purpose he had parted off a portion of his hold
with iron gratings like those of a prison, and also why he had provided
such a collection of handcuffs, fetters and other instruments, that
seemed calculated both for torture and confinement.

“He was a very communicative man, and did not hesitate to inform me,
that being a trader in negro slaves, it was necessary for him to be well
stored with all those conveniences for security’s sake; For how else,
said he, could I be sure that those savages, who have no understanding
of the happiness in store for them, would not rise upon us and cut all
our throats?--Though I immediately saw all the force of his reasoning, I
was a little staggered by the nature of his intelligence; and this I
think it probable that he perceived, for he was pleased to say, that,
being bound in the first instance for the Tagus, he would set me down
with his cargo of salt fish at Lisbon, if I had the least objection to
proceeding any further. I thanked him for his civility, and candidly
confessed that although I could have no objection to the removal of his
salt fish, I should think it ill exchanged for his cargo of slaves. I
accordingly accepted his alternative of leaving me at Lisbon; where,
though I should much regret the loss of his society, I might avail
myself of the opportunity of visiting the famous aqueduct of Alcantara,
of which I had heard so wonderful an account, and was anxious to enjoy
the sight.

“The captain acknowledged that he had heard there was such a thing to be
seen in the near neighbourhood of Lisbon, but as he had no particular
taste for sights of that sort, he had not troubled himself to go out of
his way for it: he was pleased however in the politest manner to repeat
his offer of setting me down at Lisbon; observing to me with great
satisfaction, that as we were now happily arrived within the mouth of
the river we had nothing further to apprehend; for he could assure me we
were fairly out of all possibility of mischance, being in the track of
the safest navigation in the world.

“In the very moment whilst this experienced navigator was cheering me
and himself with these pleasant assurances, a sudden shock of the vessel
threw him from his balance, and catching hold of me as he was falling,
we came together upon the deck with a considerable degree of violence.
As he fell upon me he had the advantage of being first upon his legs,
which he employed with all speed in rushing forwards to the forecastle,
whilst I was endeavouring to save myself from further bruises; for now
a cry ran through the ship, that we were stranded on a rock, and
sinking bodily. Of this information I had soon no reason to doubt, as
the water rushed in with great impetuosity. The crew were eagerly
employed in getting out the boat; but as I was persuaded that they, who
were at the trouble of launching, would naturally be the first to make
use of it, I persisted to keep my post, being resolved not to disgrace
the character of a true De Lancaster by betraying the least symptom of
impatience or alarm.

“When I had stayed till the treading over-head had ceased, and the
captain along-side was calling upon me by name to come on board the boat
and save myself, or stay where I was and be drowned, I thought it
behoved me to avail myself of an alternative, so fairly stated, though
my compliance with his offer of rescuing me from the sinking ship was
attended with no small degree of trouble and inconvenience, for I now
perceived myself to be sorely bruised.

“I exerted myself to the utmost in getting into the boat, yet my efforts
being not sufficiently adroit to satisfy the gentlemen, who were eager
to push off, I heard myself saluted with a general volley of oaths and
ludicrous buffooneries allusive to my awkwardness, which I can truly
aver were the only uncivil words, that I received from either captain or
crew, whilst I had the pleasure of sailing with them.

“The boat, in which I was, belonged to one of our Lisbon pacquets, that
had the humanity to stop her course and assist us in our distress. On
board this charitable ship I was at length conveyed, and was agreably
surprised to find myself thus unexpectedly amongst my friends and
neighbours; young Sir David Owen and his amiable mother being passengers
and bound to Lisbon. To the humanity of these friends I am indebted for
the comforts I am now enjoying in an excellent hotel on an eminence
called Buenos Ayres, from whence, if my contusions allowed me to get out
of my bed, I might enjoy a beautiful view of the town and river, and in
which, were it not for the annoyance of the flies and more domestic
vermin, I might assuage my pains with the luxury of sleep; but this,
when more familiarized to the customs of these insects, I hope still to
enjoy.

“There has been another slight shock of an earthquake yesterday, but as
I was in my bed, it did not disturb me near so much as that of the
ship, when she ran upon the rock.

“As soon as I regain the use of my limbs, I shall look out for a
suitable abode for Mrs. De Lancaster in this delicious place, where I
promise myself a high entertainment in surveying the dilapidations and
disorders occasioned by the great earthquake, which has made the town a
heap of interesting ruins.

“I have written you a long letter, so, with my duty to my father and
regards to all at home, I conclude myself, dear sister,

                   “Your very faithful servant
                      and loving brother,
                    “PHILIP DE LANCASTER.”




CHAPTER III.

_Mr. Philip De Lancaster in his Hotel at Lisbon receives the News of his
Lady’s Death, and is visited by Sir David Ap Owen. The Consequences of
that Interview are related._


If this letter was read by our hero with mixed impressions of vexation
and disgust it is little to be wondered at, for certainly no character
less extravagantly absurd than that of Philip could have dictated such a
narrative in a serious mood and without varying from the truth of fact.
The intelligence of his wife’s decease was now gone to him at Lisbon,
and the consequences, that might ensue from the fatal weakness of his
intellect and the interested cunning of the widow Owen were very
seriously to be apprehended.

His natural indolence still kept him a voluntary prisoner in his hotel
at Buenos Ayres and under the hands of his surgeon, though he had no
longer any need of surgical assistance. When Cecilia’s letter reached
his hands he was sitting, in all the costuma of a wounded invalid, in a
bed-gown and night-cap, with his leg, that, having once been bruised,
had not forfeited its privilege, resting on a stool provided with an
easy cushion. Having perused the contents, he deliberately folded up the
letter, laid it on the table before him, and, reclining back in his
chair, surrendered himself to a kind of drowsy meditation on the solemn
nature of the event, now communicated to him: at length, being in the
habit talking more confidentially to himself than to any other person,
he murmured out the following reflections, as they presented themselves
to his mind without order or connection.

“I thought she had not long to live. I was prepared for the event. It
was naturally to be expected, and Llewellyn himself seemed to cherish
very feeble hopes. Death is common; she is dead, and all the medicines
she has taken have been of no avail; even music could not save her.
Well! I have done my duty; witness the incredible pains and trouble I
have taken to seek out a suitable climate and commodious house for her
to winter in: one of these after infinite labour I had happily
discovered, and the other I was using unabating diligence to provide for
her. As things have turned out I might have spared myself this voyage;
but no matter--It is some consolation to reflect that I have done what
I could; and if my travels have not proved serviceable to her, for whose
sake I undertook them, they have not been totally unprofitable or
unpleasurable to me; for, with the exception only of the surfeit I got
of salt-fish, and the bruises I suffered by shipwreck, I passed my time
very comfortably at sea, and if I have not seen any thing worth my
notice on shore, I have been at least where it was to be seen, and that
is something for a man of curiosity like mine to reflect upon with
satisfaction. Now that I am a widower, and only in the noon of life,
people will be saying to me--Why don’t you marry again? This I am to
expect, but who can judge for me so well as I can for myself? Nobody
knows what matrimony is but those who have undergone the trial. A man
may risque it once in the way of an experiment, but to repeat it is a
sacrifice to posterity and a compliment to the sex, which I am not
disposed to make. No, no; I must not come on there any more. Let me do
Mrs. De Lancaster the justice to confess, that there was an
accommodating lassitude in her, a hypochondriac inertness, a congelation
of all the volatile humours, harmonizing so entirely with my feelings,
that I despair of finding any second wife so happily endowed; I dare not
trust myself with the widow Ap Owen: she has indeed many excellent
endowments; and in spite of all my family can say against her I will
maintain my opinion of her as a very elegant engaging woman, aye, and
one, that in many respects is entirely to my taste, but then (oh Heaven
and earth!) her eyes are so quick, her voice so shrill, her spirit so
high and her health alas! so alarmingly good, that I could never promise
myself a life of ease with her--No, no; she will not suit.”

Just as he had struck upon this ante-hymeneal sentiment Sir David Ap
Owen came into his room--I am this instant arrived from Cintra, he said,
where in the loveliest spot upon the habitable globe I have been
entertained in a princely style by a gentleman of the factory, Devereux
by name, diamond contractor with the court of Portugal, and universally
looked up to as a man nobly descended and of great wealth. He has one
son, who jointly conducts his business, and one daughter, who to the
recommendation of a very handsome person adds that of a very
considerable fortune: In short, I have some thoughts of the girl, and in
consequence of that idea have a small favour to require of you.

Name it, Sir David.

Simply to take an opportunity of calling on Mr. Devereux, and in the
course of conversation naturally to say, that you know me to be what I
am--A man of honour, fortune and of high respectability on the score of
family. This is what I want from you, friend Philip, and all I want from
any man. You know it to be true and of course will have no difficulty in
averring it. I am a stranger in this country: impostors have assumed
names and titles, and Devereux, being a trader, is a cautious man. Come,
sir, put on your clothes, and accompany me directly: my carriage is in
waiting: as for your leg, it has been well these three weeks.

But if I were to put on my clothes, Philip replied, I could not go out
in them, for I have no mourning, and by a letter from my sister, just
now received, I am informed that Mrs. De Lancaster is no more.

Dead; defunct?

Even so.

That is an event indeed of great importance. In one respect it liberates
you; in another it enthrals, and binds you to your promise.

I don’t rightly understand to what promise you allude.

Is it possible, rejoined Sir David, (his fierce eyes flashing as his
fury kindled) is it possible you can feign to forget the engagement you
are under to a lady, whom I have the honour of being related to, and
whose natural protector I am? If your memory, Mr. Philip, is of that
deceitful unretentive texture, you are indeed a true De Lancaster. But
make good your engagement out of hand: a lady’s honour may not be
trifled with. The inveterate animosity of your rancorous son, so called,
and the injurious charges he has fostered, forged, and urged against me
in my absence, have this morning been reported to me by my agent at
Penruth. They are such as he must answer and atone for, unless you by
fulfilling your solemn promise to my mother, shall interpose your
fatherly mediation and heal the else irreparable breach between our
families.

It is not my fault, Philip calmly replied; for all the world knows me to
be a man of peace and quiet; but as to healing breaches in the manner
you prescribe, give me leave to observe, Sir David, that it is a very
early day for me to be thinking of a second wife before I have yet put
on mourning for my first.

Yet, sir, you must think of it, reiterated Sir David, (elevating his
voice) and seriously too, though I shall not hurry you in the execution
of it. You shall have time to mourn, if that be what you wish for; but
my spirit has been much too deeply galled by the son to bear any
aggravation from the gentleman, who allows himself to be called the
father--Therefore in one word--Your bond, sir, to my mother, or your
blood.--There is but this alternative: so take your choice.

You will give me time, Sir David, to deliberate upon this.

Just as much time, Mr. Philip De Lancaster, as it will cost my lawyer to
write out the bond. I will call upon you before two hours are past.
With these threatening words the loud-tongued bravo bolted out of the
room--Mercy on me, exclaimed the affrighted Philip, what shall I do now,
hedged in as I am between matrimony and murder?




CHAPTER IV.

_Mr. Philip De Lancaster receives a second Visit from Sir David Ap Owen,
and is forced into Measures not very willingly acceded to._


Faithful to his time, Sir David walked into poor Philip’s room without
ceremony, followed by the bearer of the bond, and accompanied by a
miscreant, who, in the counterfeited dress of an officer, was in his
true character and profession nothing better than a bully and assassin.

There is the bond, said Ap Owen, throwing it on the table: this
gentleman, who drew it up, will read it over to you, and point out the
place where you are to sign and seal. Though in itself a mere matter of
form, yet where a lady’s honour is concerned, it is a form
indispensable. It will behove you therefore instantly to complete it: if
not, this brave and gallant officer, who holds a respectable command in
the army of his most faithful majesty, and is my friend, will be under
the unpleasant necessity to demand satisfaction of you in my name, and
settle time and place for deciding our difference by the death of one of
us.

Immediately the bond-bearer began to gabble it over with that kind of
inarticulate rapidity, which to Philip’s perturbed senses gave little
chance for understanding it. This ceremony being over, the operation of
signing and sealing was pressed forward with the utmost haste, and urged
by Sir David and his mock-military friend with no common importunity.

What could poor Philip do, _hedged in_, as he had observed, _between
matrimony and murder_? He looked up, and in the face of the
black-whiskered demon-like assassin, that stood over him with the pen,
read his fate if he refused: he signed the bond, and sealed it with _the
winged harp_, that never since the days of Bladud had been so disgraced:
by this he was pledged to a penalty of twenty thousand pounds, if he
failed in the conditions, or, if he fulfilled them, consigned over to
the arms of Mrs. Rachel Ap Owen, relict of Mr. David Ap Owen, and
daughter of he knew not whom.

As soon as this was done, the bond-bearer folded up his paper, thrust it
into his bosom and walked off: the principal and his second sate down on
each side of Philip--We have now one common interest, said Sir David,
and are friends for life. The injurious treatment I have received from
those, with whom I shall be so nearly connected, and chiefly from your
son, may now be amicably adjusted. You, Mr. Philip De Lancaster, will be
united to one of the most amiable women in the world; a lady descended
from the illustrious house of De La Cerda, and endowed with every grace,
and every virtue, that can render the married state correctly honourable
and supremely happy.

If it be but quiet, that is all I ask, poor Philip said in a desponding
tone. After a short pause he added--If this gentleman has no particular
objection to leaving us alone, I should wish to say a few words to you,
Sir David, in private upon family concerns.

Sir David desired the colonel, as he called him, to wait for him in the
next room: Philip took the liberty of informing him that he should go to
England by the pacquet for the purpose of settling some affairs, that in
consequence of Mrs. De Lancaster’s decease would require his presence.

To this Sir David replied--I perceive you have not strictly attended to
the conditions of the bond, you would have else have known that to
separate yourself from my mother before marriage would involve you in
the forfeiture of it. We mean to pass the winter months at Cintra, where
I have engaged a house in the near neighbourhood of Mr. Devereux’s
villa. It is sufficiently large to accommodate us both; and you will
there not only find yourself in an earthly paradise, but enjoy the full
opportunity of cultivating a more close acquaintance with the truly
amiable object, who is destined to make your future days respectable and
happy. What a violation would it be of all the rules of gallantry and
good faith were you to run over to England and desert her! No, my dear
sir, (and here Sir David took his hand and attempted a look, which, if
he meant it as a smile, was a wretched and most libellous imitation) no,
my dear sir, he said, I could not for any consideration in life submit
to part from my good father-in-law elect, for whom I have conceived so
cordial an esteem, and in whose society I promise myself so many
agreeable hours. Having now definitively adjusted your alliance with my
mother, I shall lose no further time in sounding Mr. Devereux on the
disposal of his daughter, and we may very probably effect a double
marriage at the same happy moment, provided only that I find the young
lady’s fortune answer my expectations.

That is truly a very prudent consideration, Philip replied, and puts me
in mind, Sir David, to ask you what is the fortune I am to expect with
the lady your mother.

The happiest that can befal you, was the answer, and a bond of twenty
thousand pounds cancelled on your wedding-day. With these words Ap Owen
left the room, whilst poor Philip, silenced but not satisfied, made no
further effort to detain him.

Though Mrs. Rachel De Lancaster had some grounds for expecting a
proposal, she had no such plea upon the score of actual promise as could
constitute a claim so peremptory as now was urged upon him; and with all
the partiality he had ever felt or expressed for the widow, it may well
be doubted if his dread of marriage would not in all cases have
outweighed his hopes of happiness. But now, crest-fallen and spiritless,
in a strange country, which he dare not quit, and conscious, that,
except within the walls of his far-distant home, he had not in the world
a friend, to whom he could unbosom his sorrows and appeal for succour
and advice, he poignantly felt the full impression of his distressful
situation. To his father he was ashamed to write; to his sister writing
could not serve him; Colonel Wilson was not a man for his purpose, and
there remained only his son John, whom, though he had hitherto treated
as a child, he now thought proper to address by letter; and in the
course of the next day, after as much meditation as his mind was capable
of, he wrote as follows.

                “Dear son!

     “The circumstance of your mother’s death, communicated to me in a
     letter from your aunt, has involved me in a very serious
     difficulty, of which I lose no time to give you an account. Sir
     David Ap Owen, who has settled himself here for the winter, and
     with whom I am upon the best terms, has used very cogent means to
     prevail upon me to enter into contract of marriage, claiming the
     fulfilment of a promise, which he states that I have made to Mrs.
     Rachel Ap Owen his mother, when I visited her at Penruth Abbey.
     Now though I will not deny but that words were said by me, which
     she has a right to consider as extremely flattering, I do not think
     they can be made to bear the interpretation of an absolute promise,
     as insisted upon by Sir David. I protest to you, son John, I am not
     a man inclined to hasty measures, more especially of a matrimonial
     nature, being, as you know, rather studious of my repose; and of
     course I took some pains to satisfy the gentleman that, with all
     possible respect for the lady, it would suit me better to leave her
     in possession of her tranquillity, and continue to enjoy my own.
     Sir David’s answer to this was by the statement of an alternative,
     which was not a little embarrassing, as he left me nothing but a
     choice of difficulties; declaring that I must either instantly
     decide to keep faith with his mother, and pledge myself to marry
     her, or turn out with him and end the difference by the death of
     one of us. Now though I am not afraid of death in a natural way,
     knowing we all must die, yet I am for conscience-sake a most
     determined enemy to duelling, by which my grandfather lost his
     life; I therefore had insuperable objections to the latter part of
     his proposal; and seeing him also accompanied by a gentleman of a
     very martial appearance, who, though offering himself as second
     only, seemed by far more terrible than his principal, I thought
     good to compromise the matter, and executed a bond, obliging myself
     under a very heavy penalty (not less than twenty thousand pounds)
     to wed the lady on the expiration of three months to come. Now as
     every one must acknowledge the uncommon merits of Mrs. Rachel Ap
     Owen, and none can be more sensible of them than I am, I console
     myself with the reflection, that if I shall be perfectly recovered
     from my bruises, when the time comes that our union is to take
     place, it may prove the happy means of restoring that antient and
     accustomed harmony between our families, which with much regret I
     understand has of late been interrupted. You are thus possessed of
     what I have to say, and as I suspect that my father will be adverse
     to this hasty match; and doubt if even Cecilia with all her candour
     will be entirely reconciled to it, I conjure you by your filial
     duty and affection, if you find them obstinate in their opposition,
     to come over in person to my relief and comfort; forasmuch I am
     bound not to stir from this country, and so closely watched that,
     were I disposed to attempt it, I am certain the attempt would be
     frustrated, and perhaps be fatal.

     “This is the first letter I ever wrote to you; lay it to your
     heart: recollect that you are my son, and if haply you possess that
     active spirit of your ancestors, which has not descended upon me,
     take pity on my situation, and hasten to the rescue of your
     affectionate, but afflicted, father--

                                     “PHILIP DE LANCASTER.”

Philip had just time to set his name to this lamentable epistle, when a
young gentleman of good person and elegant address, who had been
announced by the name of Devereux, entered the room. He understood Mr.
De Lancaster to be in habits of friendship with Sir David Ap Owen, and,
if he had not been misinformed, they were near neighbours in
Merionethshire.

Philip said he had been rightly informed. They were near neighbours. Sir
David’s seat at Penruth was not above four miles from Kray Castle, where
he lived with his father.

Penruth has been represented to me, said the gentleman, as a very fine
old venerable mansion--Philip nodded assent--And the estate about it
very considerable; indeed, as I have been told, very capital.

I have been told the same, Philip said; but I am not curious about
people’s estates. Sir Owen, this young gentleman’s uncle, lived very
handsomely, and very hospitably, upon it. That is all I know of the
matter.

I suspect, rejoined the other, I may appear to you more inquisitive than
I ought to be; but I beg leave to say in my own defence that I was
particularly referred to you by Sir David himself.

Sir David could not have referred you to a more unfit man: I am as
ignorant of my own father’s estate as I am of Sir David’s, and of Sir
David’s as I am of your’s.

Why then, sir, I must pay a visit to Penruth myself; for I have my
father’s strict commands to obtain information of every particular
necessary for him to know relative to Sir David Ap Owen, who, I must now
tell you, has made proposals to us for marrying my sister.

Yes, and to me, said Philip, for marrying his mother; you see therefore
it is a family-affair between us, and though I have not a single
syllable to offer why Sir David’s marriage with your sister should not
take place, I confess it would not break my heart if mine with his
mother was put off for ever. Now, sir, if you are bound to England, I
can truly say, I wish I were going with you; but if you meditate a visit
to Penruth Abbey, where there is nobody to receive you, I most earnestly
recommend it to you to turn aside and go to Kray Castle, where my father
and his family will be happy to see you, and where you may do me a
singular piece of service, if you will take charge of this letter, which
I have just been writing, and deliver it privately to my son, whilst I
will trouble you to be the bearer of a few lines to my good and worthy
father, simply to let him know how respectable a visitor I shall have
the honour to introduce to him, when you are pleased to avail yourself
of his well known hospitality.

Sir, replied Devereux, I am setting off for England in to-morrow’s
pacquet. Of your letter to your son I will take faithful charge, and
deliver it to him in the manner you prescribe. I also thankfully embrace
your very kind offer of introducing me to your father, of whose high
character for worth and honour I am not uninformed; whilst I must own
there is a mysterious kind of cloud about Sir David Ap Owen, through
which I am not able perfectly to see my way; for I find him totally
unknown to our British envoy here, and have not heard him say what
brings him and the lady, to whom it seems you are engaged, into this
country, having so lately succeeded to a great situation and
establishment in his own. With respect to his proposed connection with
my family, I must beg to say, that although we reside here in the
character and capacity of merchants, we have nevertheless such
pretensions on the score of noble birth and property by no means
inconsiderable, as give us a perfect right to use every honorable
precaution for knowing whom we are to receive into our alliance,
provided the gentleman, who proposes, shall prove acceptable to us as
well as to my sister; on whom nothing has been sparingly bestowed, that
either nature could give or education improve.

This being said, what further passed is not important to relate. Philip
wrote a short letter to his father, and having delivered it, and his
secret pacquet, to Mr. Devereux, took his leave of him, and as he
grasped his hand with a sensation, rarely, if ever, felt by him before,
he sent from his sad heart a longing sigh towards his beloved native
country, which fate, that had doomed him never more to visit it but as
a corpse, gave to the winds, that dispersed it on its passage.




CHAPTER V.

_Another Soliloquy of Mr. Philip De Lancaster. Our History returns to
the Family at Kray Castle._


When the Irish tailor, who had been a journeyman botcher in London, and
was now become a master of journeymen botchers in Lisbon, had invested
the well-made person of Mr. Philip De Lancaster in an ill-made suit of
rotten black, the mourning bridegroom elect, having paid the bill and
dismissed the bill-maker, examined himself in the glass, and thus, as
was customary with him, mournfully soliloquized--

“Luckless man that I am, must I put aside this habit on my wedding-day?
Wherefore; on what pretence; I have undergone that ceremony once
already, and by experience can more than guess to what sad hours that
ceremony leads. Marriage, by high authority denominated honourable, is,
through perversion of its purposes, to many become disgraceful,
burdensome to most, and a blessing, as I verily believe, to few, if any,
who know how to compute what is a blessing, and what is their bane.
There are indeed a few soft silly things amongst the mass of female
spinsters, that a man, who knows the value of their ignorance, might
possibly with proper care prevent from growing wiser; but a widow--(Oh
my hapless fortune, Rachel Owen is a widow--) who can keep in ignorance?
Not I; not any man.

“Her eyes, her air, her action, every movement and every word
prognosticate sagacity, that will not be deceived: then what a pipe?
Good Heaven, if that voice, which is so shrill whilst only warbling
Spanish tonadillas, that to me are unintelligible, shall be roused to
exert itself in plain English argumentation, farewel to all repose! nor
peace, nor quiet shall I ever know. How am I sure she is not a Jewess?
She may, for aught that I can tell, be lineally descended from that
wicked king, who put to death all the innocents; and if so, how shall I
escape? Happy Devereux, he is on the seas: would I were on them too, or
under them, rather than what I may be, aye, and shall be if that
sharp-eyed widow sets her wits to work. I begin to think I made a wrong
choice, and should have taken my chance of turning out with the son,
rather than of turning in where I shall have no chance at all. There
seems nothing left for me but to fall extremely sick, and that I may
really be so without feigning, I will instantly call in a Portuguese
physician, and (which is more than any patient less desperate will
promise) I am resolute to take his physic. Ah, where is my good friend
and countryman Llewellyn? My poor wife followed his prescriptions, and
behold! here am I in his livery, black as the hands of man can make me.
Ah Llewellyn, Llewellyn, in Wales it was quite enough for me to endure
your company; I never wished to be your patient till now that I am in
Lisbon, and under sentence of a dose more bitter and against my palate
than you ever mixed--But what if John De Lancaster should come upon my
call? There would be a champion worthy of my cause: Glendowr’s magic
could not conjure up a braver or a stouter spirit. He is young, not
married, not, like me, bent to the yoke, but free, untrammeled and
untamed. I’ll cherish hope; I’ll feed upon the thought that my brave boy
will come, and vex myself no more.”

Whilst this sad ditty was in recitation Devereux was wafted swiftly over
the ocean, favoured by a freshening gale, that blowed direct for
England, as if impatient to salute the mother of the winds and mistress
of the waves, amidst which she sits safe and encircled on her chalky
throne.

Mean time our John De Lancaster, from whose society we have unwillingly
been separated for some short while, could hardly count the hours, so
quick they passed, when with his loved Amelia by his side,

    _They fled away with down upon their feet_.

It might now be most truly said that the good old chief of the family at
Kray Castle was surrounded by a groupe of happy subjects, all loyal,
free and affectionate, all witnessing his benevolence, regaling
themselves in the sunshine of his smile and sharing the enjoyments of
his hospitable board: his cooks seemed perfectly persuaded that spits
were made to turn, whilst his cellerman probably forgot that the
property of a spigot was to stop a barrel. Scarce a day passed, which
was not marked by the attention of his neighbouring friends; Sir Arthur
Floyd and the new allies were frequent in their visits, for they had a
passionate affection for our hero, and whilst their eyes dwelt with
approving pleasure on the fair Amelia, they destined him to her arms,
and paid her their devoirs as to a bride elect.

Mrs. Jennings, respited from all the anxious responsibility of a
governess, seemed to retain nothing but that unalterable affection for
her beloved charge, which was natural to her, and began to think of
retiring to her independence at Denbigh--I see you now, my dear Amelia,
she said, firmly seated in the hearts of this liberal and benignant
family, adopted by the excellent Cecilia, and favoured beyond all my
hopes by the venerable De Lancaster; and what more have I to do but to
lay down my cares, and rejoice in your good fortune? I have to the best
of my power fulfilled the promise, that I made to your dear father,
whose conscious spirit, now in bliss, looks down upon you; my prayers
for your happiness, and for the life of him, on whom your happiness
depends, will for the remnant of my days be fervently put up to that
Almighty Power, whose attribute is mercy. Go on, my child, in the right
course, in which I strove to train you, and from which you never yet
have strayed. Cultivate Cecilia: Guard your young heart against the
dangerous allurements of sudden elevation, and that unlooked-for
prosperity, which is at hand to put your constancy, your piety, your
humility to the test. Mean, low-born persons are too apt to turn giddy
on the wheel of fortune, when it lifts them from the dirt; but
recollect, that in hereditary rank and dignity your pretensions are as
high as those of the De Lancasters and Morgans, who in riches, not in
ancestry, have an advantage over you, and riches only, as you well know,
constitute no actual superiority. Let your humility therefore, though in
itself one of the most recommendatory qualities you can possess, be that
gentle virtue, which your religion dictates, but never let it sink below
the mark, at which true conscious honour has a right to stand.

Cecilia’s lessons, not less edifying, were of another cast; for every
word, that fell from her lips, was tinctured with a suavity and grace
peculiar to her elegance of character. When she addressed her
admonitions to the heart, their object was to inspire it with
benevolence, with charity, with resignation and that christian
lowliness, which whilst on earth it sinks, secures its happiest surest
flight to Heaven. To these Amelia listened with delight; on these she
formed herself, and, happily for her, whilst she received the precept,
she beheld the example, that confirmed it. Every day gave her new
graces, till the charms of beauty were but as ornaments, whose only use
is to set off the lustre of the real gem.

As for the grand-father of her beloved, it was something curious to
remark how soon she found a strenuous advocate in him. When he descanted
she was all attention; nothing could draw her from him. He would say,
Amelia listens to me with good sense and apprehension: There is a marked
discernment in her silence, that is more pleasing, aye, and more
eloquent than all the studied praise that flattery can suggest--I have
been thinking, he said one day, as they were sitting in their family
circle, I have been thinking, John, that if I live to see the day when
you shall be of age, how perfectly it would complete and crown my
felicity, would you take it into your gallant mind to make me a present
on that joyful occasion. I would have you think it is not a trifle, that
will satisfy me. It must be a measure of your esteem for me, and a full
satisfaction, recompence and return for all the love, the care, the fond
anxiety, that you have merited and I bestowed. Look around, and tell me
if you guess my meaning.

John had not far to look, for Amelia sate beside him struggling to
conceal her consciousness of the allusion, and dreading to hear that,
which would have given her such delight to have overheard without the
confusion of being present. In this instant, most opportunely for her
rescue, whilst all her efforts could not prevent her blushes from
betraying her, the harp of David Williams sounded in the hall, and she
exclaimed above her usual pitch--Oh, what a charming strain.

Bid him come in, said the old gentleman, addressing himself to his
grandson, and if the muse has visited her votary, perhaps she will
supply him with words to that strain, which our dear Amelia seems to be
so pleased with--David has a quick invention when his wits are well
warmed with his favourite metheglin.

The minstrel entered and was led to a seat in the corner of the room, at
the farthest distance from the company assembled. Having lightly sounded
the strings of his harp to prove if they were in perfect tune, he asked
if the young stranger lady was in the room.

Mr. De Lancaster told him that Miss Amelia Jones was present, and had
expressed herself much pleased with the melody, which he had been
rehearsing in the hall: Could he play it over to them again?

Perhaps not quite the same: He would attempt something as like it as he
could recollect, he hoped it would be not much worse, but he doubted if
it would be exactly the same.

David, said De Lancaster again, you have enquired if Miss Jones is
present; I have told you that she is, and if you could see her, and be
satisfied how fair a lady you are invited to address, your muse,
inspired by her beauty, would be propitious, and mere melody would not
be all, that we should hear from you.

Roused by this challenge to his genius, the blind old bard spread his
hands upon the harp, and having rested his forehead on the frame of it
for a very few minutes, after an appropriate prelude, extemporaneously
broke forth as follows.

    “Lady, they tell me thou art passing fair,
      And blest by Heaven with a celestial mind;
    I hear thee speaking, but I know not where,
      For woe is me, poor minstrel! I am blind.

    Yet when the muse inspires me, I can trace
      Forms, that to mental vision seem divine;
    My fancy can pourtray an angel’s face,
      Dress it in angel smiles, and call it thine.

    Still through the windings of these antient tow’rs
      Your dark musician can explore his way,
    For my dear patron’s animating pow’rs
      To these benighted orbs can give the day.

    Object of all our love, of all our care.
      To thee, brave youth, our honest praise is giv’n;
    Thy deeds, recorded in the poor man’s pray’r,
      With that sweet incense shall ascend to Heav’n.

    Oft have I bless’d thee, borne thee in my arms,
      And oft have hush’d thy wailing infant cry,
    Or witching thy young heart with music’s charms
      Chang’d the loud laugh to pity’s melting sigh.

    And shall not he, that feels the virgin’s wrongs,
      In some fond virgin’s nuptial arms be blest,
    Whilst grateful bards record him in their songs
      In love the happiest, and in heart the best?

    But who is this in bridal robes array’d?
      What beauteous vision is it that I see?
    Hail, fair Amelia! this celestial shade
      Is the bright form my day-dream shapes for thee.”




CHAPTER VI.

_Devereux arrives at Kray Castle._


When David Williams had concluded his lay and retired, Mr. De Lancaster
gravely observed, that in ancient times prophecies and prayers and even
laws were delivered in verse; then, turning to his grandson, he said,
Let David’s vision be realized on the day that you are of age, and you
and I, John, shall be two of the happiest of human beings--

Here he was interrupted by the entrance of a servant, who brought a
letter; it was that, which Philip had sent by young Devereux as his
introduction to the hospitalities of Kray Castle. A servant was
dispatched by Devereux with it as he entered the park, and the old
gentleman had barely time to read it to his family circle when the
porter’s bell announced an arrival. John hastened to the hall door, as
Devereux in his travelling equipage drove up, and received him with that
natural cordiality, which, assuring him of his welcome, might be said to
constitute friendship at first sight. When he presented him to his
father, the good man had entered the hall, and, taking him by the hand,
said--I have read the letter, Mr. Devereux, which you bring me from my
son, and am proud of the honour you confer upon me. I beg you will
consider this house as your own, and the longer stay you shall think fit
to make in it, the happier we shall be. I know your noble family full
well, and respect every branch of it. He then said aloud to his
servants--See that proper care be taken of every thing belonging to Mr.
Devereux, and be sure you let his people want for nothing: they are
strangers to this country.

During the ceremony of introducing him to Cecilia and the rest of the
family, in which Mr. De Lancaster was somewhat precise, young Devereux
acquitted himself as a gentleman familiar with good company, gracefully
and without embarrassment: in his person he was light and elegant, and
in his countenance there was great expression, though not perfect
symmetry of features: there was a quickness of intellect and of spirit
in his eyes, that nobody could mistake.

He was speedily at his ease, and in answer to Mr. De Lancaster’s
enquiries said, that he had been extremely lucky in a good passage by
the pacquet, and not less so in his journey since his landing. He
expressed himself highly pleased in the opportunity he now had of
visiting his native country, for he was born and bred in Herefordshire,
where his father had an hereditary property, and it was part of his
business in England to look into the affairs of that estate.

To Cecilia’s question about her brother’s health he replied, that Mr. De
Lancaster had received some slight hurt in the ship, that brought him
over, and when he visited him at Buenos Ayres, had his leg upon a chair;
but added with a smile that he believed he rested it merely from habit,
as he observed, that he had the perfect use of it, whenever he had
occasion to employ it.

That is so like him, said De Lancaster to Colonel Wilson--Aye, replied
the colonel, I would not change my wooden leg for both his, if I made no
better use of them than he does.

Is my father coming over, said young De Lancaster?

I believe not yet. He has friends at Cintra, and ’tis likely he may pass
the winter there.

I hope, Mr. Devereux, the old gentleman observed, my son has the honour
of being known to your father, and that it is in his family he forms his
friendships.

I have no doubt it will be so, Devereux replied; but at present Mr. De
Lancaster has formed no connexions but with a lady and gentleman, who I
believe are neighbours of your’s, when they are at home. If I rightly
understand Sir David Ap Owen, who is the gentleman I allude to, he has a
considerable property in this county, and a handsome seat not far from
hence.

Sir David Owen has a very antient and respectable station in this near
neighbourhood, called Penruth Abbey, and a very considerable property in
land about it. The lately deceased Sir Owen ap Owen was a worthy
gentleman, lived hospitably, and was respected by his countrymen and
neighbours: he was truly of a very antient stock, and I had the
happiness to consider him as my particular and very good friend. Penruth
Abbey is well worth your seeing, and if you have a wish to ride over, my
servants shall attend upon you. I am sorry to say, that between our
houses, since Sir Owen’s death, all intercourse is at an end.

Devereux bowed, and on that subject said no more. The conversation then
took a general turn, till supper was served up by the orange-tawney
liverymen in great feudal state, and Devereux, to whom these specimens
of antient manners were extremely interesting, was in due time and order
ushered to an excellent apartment, by Cecilia’s direction elegantly set
out and provided with every thing, that was appropriate to his comfort
and repose.

The next morning, after breakfast, he signified to John that he wished
to have a few minutes in private with him. In a rustic building at the
end of a walk, that winded though the ornamented ground, he delivered to
our young hero the letter he was secretly encharged with from poor
Philip--When he had read the letter, John said, there is matter in this
letter, that concerns me nearly, and affects me deeply. Are the
contents, so far as they relate to my father’s situation with the widow
Ap Owen, known to you?

In some degree Devereux confessed they were not unknown to him. He had
been informed by Sir David that Mr. De Lancaster had entered into an
engagement for marrying that lady.

I would go to the farthest foot of land on the globe of earth, said
John, to save him from that fatal, that disgraceful, that detestable
connection. Rather would I see my father dead and in his coffin, nay,
rather would I die myself, than see him married to that odious, that
felonious woman.

You astonish me, cried Devereux; she must artfully have concealed her
character from me, if it merits to be so described, which I must not
presume to doubt of. And now, Mr. De Lancaster, since you have so far
trusted to me by committing yourself to expressions of such abhorrence
with respect to that lady’s character, I will, with your permission,
confide to you the situation, in which I stand towards her son--Sir
David Ap Owen has made proposals of marriage with my sister--(John
started, and betrayed considerable agitation)--Yes sir, he has offered
himself to my father, and it is solely upon that account I am come over
to assure myself of particulars as stated by Sir David, touching the
character, which he bears in his county, the family he is of, and the
fortune he possesses. Now my father conceives, though for the present he
is engaged in contracts as a trader, yet that he is intitled both by
birth and property to be perfectly secured from any misrepresentation
whatsoever, and I must freely confess we think there is some mystery
about Sir David, and cannot divine his motive for deserting a fine place
and property, so newly devolved upon him, and coming to Lisbon of all
places in the world, unless upon the plea of health, which by no means
seems to be the case either with his mother or himself. His pretensions,
as he states them, are such as my father cannot reasonably oppose, and
it does not appear, if we were satisfied as to all essential points of
character and general conduct, that Sir David Ap Owen would be
unacceptable to my sister, who, I must take the liberty to say, is
qualified to look quite as high, as to this gentleman, who addresses
her; and, having no flaw in her pretensions, has a right to expect that
none such shall be found in his. In this predicament I stand, protector
of a sister’s honour, and responsible for her happiness, which I am sure
you will allow to be a serious and a sacred trust. If therefore you
could bring your mind to put that repose in my honour, which, if you
knew me better, I flatter myself you would not withhold, and would speak
to me as friend to friend respecting this connection, you would confer
the greatest favour possible on me and mine.

Sir, replied the gallant youth, (touched to the heart by the appeal now
made to him, which brought to his recollection poor Ap Rees’s case) I
have no doubt of your honour, and as I am determined to go over to the
rescue of my father from his dangerous situation, you shall in the mean
time hear nothing from me, or in my company, relative to Sir David,
which I will not be ready to avouch in presence of your father to Sir
David’s face, if you can bring him to the meeting. However, sir, as
there are certain restrictions, which bear with extreme force upon me,
and do not affect others equally able to satisfy your enquiries, I will
instantly conduct you, if you have no objection to lengthen your walk,
to a place, where every thing shall be made known to you by one, whose
veracity cannot be questioned.




CHAPTER VII.

_John De Lancaster and Devereux visit the Minstrel Ap Rees._


It was to the romantic little tenement, which John De Lancaster in his
bounty had bestowed upon Ap Rees, he now proceeded with his companion
Devereux, pondering by the way upon the wretched situation of his
helpless father, and devising means how to overcome the difficulties,
that he foresaw would assail him in his project for leaving England. He
could as yet see no way through the labyrinth of obstacles, that from
all quarters would be opposed to his departure; and of these the sorrows
of Amelia, though probably the least obtrusive, were by no means the
least to be apprehended, or the easiest to surmount.

The information he could gain from Devereux did not in all points
satisfy his curiosity; for Sir David Ap Owen had said nothing to him of
the menaces he employed for obtaining the bond, and with Philip he had
had but one interview, which disclosed still less of what John wanted to
be explained than the letter, which he had been reading.

As they went on their way discoursing, the cottage of Ap Rees in all its
rural loveliness caught the eyes of Devereux, and caused him to break
forth in rapturous admiration of it--We are going thither, said our
hero. That is the habitation of the minstrel Ap Rees, who from his
childhood has been domesticated in the Ap Owen family, and is, as you
will soon discover, a person of no ordinary talents; and although now
old and blind, and (which is worse than both) broken-hearted by
misfortunes, yet is he second to none that our country has to boast of,
either as harmonist or bard.

Alas! said Devereux, old and blind and full of sorrows, with feelings
yet alive to every pang they give him, what accumulated misery must his
be! Heavy enough, I should conceive, must be his loss, who cannot see
the beauties of this lovely spot, nor gratify his senses with the
scenery, that nature in the wantonness of her luxuriance spreads around
him. But doubtless it is to the bounty of the heir of the Ap Owens, that
he owes these comforts, this asylum for old age to rest in, till
Providence shall graciously be pleased to terminate his sorrows, and
close those eyes in death, that are already merged in darkness and
despair.

’Tis natural, John replied, that you should so conjecture: but no Ap
Owen gave him that asylum.

To whom then does he owe it?

No answer was given to this question; and now the notes of the harp,
accompanied by the voice, caused them to stop and listen at the wicket
of the little plat of grass, that for a few yards ran sloping down from
the cottage. The harmony was of the most pathetic, sad and solemn cast,
delicately touched by the hand of the master, but of the words they
could distinguish few, expect that by a passage more strongly given out
than the rest, they concluded it to be the lamentation of a father at
the funeral of his child.

He ceased and all was silent in the house--’Tis exquisite, said
Devereux; but pray don’t ask him to repeat it. I should not like to see
him, and to hear him at the same time--John walked up to the house-door,
opened it gently, and entered the room, followed by Devereux.

The old man had replaced himself in his elbow chair; his son Robert had
put away his harp, and in a corner of the room apart sate a young woman,
who held her white apron to her eyes, and appeared to be weeping.

As soon as Robert announced Mr. John De Lancaster Ap Rees rose from his
seat, and with his claspt hands pressed upon his bosom, bowed his head
and exclaimed--The Providence of Heaven be with you, my most honoured
benefactor! Are you come to visit your poor beadsman? Oh, that I could
see you! With the benevolence of an angel in your heart I am sure you
must have the divinity of an angel in your countenance.

Robin, said the youth, do not address me in those terms. Call me your
friend; for such I really am. The gratification I receive in giving
comfort to a man like you, if indeed you are comforted, is full
repayment; I deserve no praise. Now tell me sincerely; what is there
besides that I can do to put you at your ease?

Nothing is wanting, he replied: Man can do no more for man than you have
done for me. I have my son yet left; thanks to your bounteous goodness
for the blessing! she in the corner, Sally Gwynne by name, a kinswoman
of my late wife, is a good girl and waits upon me kindly: she was the
beloved friend of my poor Nancy, and has been much affected by my
mournful dirge: I did not know it, else I would have stopped. But sure I
hear the footsteps of another in the room.

Your ear is correct, said De Lancaster. It is Mr. Devereux, a friend of
mine. He listened to your dirge with great attention. I would not have
you to repeat it, but let him know the purport. Tell that young woman to
withdraw--And now I am about to put a melancholy task upon you, but it
much concerns me, that this gentleman, newly arrived from Lisbon, should
hear you briefly, truly and distinctly relate the manner of your
daughter’s death.

Where is the gentleman?

He stands before you.

Sir, I call Heaven to witness that my child was murdered. Her vital
functions were destroyed and poisoned by drugs of an inflammatory and
deadly property, which, rendering her insane, drove her to suicide, and
so brought on a death of double horror. This is no longer circumstance,
but proof: The inspection of the corpse, the deposition of the
surgeons, and, above all, the confession of the accomplice, bring it
home to the criminal, and would convict him of murder, could he be
brought to trial.

What prevents it? Devereux demanded with voice and look so
horrow-struck, as seemed to indicate suspicion of the issue.

His flight prevents it: his accusing conscience, which haunts him with
the dreadful recollection, that my poor Innocent, my virtuous child
withstood his gross desires, till to effect his brutal purposes he
villainously contrived to deprive her of her senses, and to the crime of
murder added that of violation.

Name the villain, Devereux exclaimed.

The minstrel rose from his seat, and, laying his hand upon his heart, in
a firm tone replied--David Ap Owen--my dead patron’s heir; and Heaven
so judge me as I speak the truth!

Enough! said Devereux. I set off to-morrow.




CHAPTER VIII.

_John De Lancaster confers with his Grandfather upon the Purport of the
Letter, he had received from Lisbon._


When Devereux had taken his departure from the cottage of the Minstrel,
following the steps of De Lancaster, as he led the way towards Kray
Castle, after long silence and much meditation, he thus addressed his
companion--The insult, which this outlawed villain has put upon my
family by audaciously attempting to ensnare my sister, calls on me to
expose him in the most public manner, and he shall not escape the
disgrace he merits. My presence will be required without delay, and as I
can now see full cause why you should be as deeply interested to rescue
your father from his engagement as I am to save my sister from all
chance of so horrible a connection, what prevents our setting off
together? I cannot promise you a reception so noble and so elegant as
you give me, for we have no Kray Castles in Portugal, but a sincere and
cordial welcome I can truly assure you of. You will find comforts at
least with us, that are not every where to be met with in that country.

John was about to make answer, when being now near the castle, they were
met by Cecilia and Amelia, whom they joined, and of course nothing more
was said upon the subject in their company.

There could be no doubt in the mind of young De Lancaster as to the
necessity he was under of communicating to his grandfather the letter he
had received from Lisbon, and he resolved to do it in the first instance
without consulting even his friend Edward Wilson.

He found the good man alone in his library, and immediately began by
requesting him to give order that they should not be interrupted, as he
had something of a private nature to impart to him. This was soon done,
and John, having briefly stated the purport of the letter, delivered it
to his grandfather. It required all the philosophy of old De Lancaster
to restrain his anger and astonishment within any bounds--Is this
disgrace, he cried, to fall upon my name and family? It must not be; it
shall not.

You will suffer me then, said John, to go over and prevent it. You see,
my dear sir, I am called upon by my father: it is my duty to obey him:
he is in distress, and expects me.

Let him expect. ’Tis the sluggard’s fate to expect. Am I to sacrifice
the beloved of my heart; am I to extinguish the last spark of my hope,
the only relique of my ancient family, to redeem a coward from his
ignominious bond!

If my unhappy father is a coward, the youth replied, and reddened as he
spake, let me at least convince the world, that the disgrace stops at
me, and that there is but one coward in existence, that bears the name
of De Lancaster.

I’ll go myself: I am his father; the disgrace is mine.

Sir!--exclaimed the youth--You’ll go yourself?--You, you to Portugal?
Forbid it, Heaven! my aunt, myself, your whole united family and friends
will be upon our knees to turn your mind from such a desperate thought.
What can be the objection to my going? where is the danger? what have I
to fear? you won’t suppose that I would condescend to turn out with that
outlaw, that convicted murderer, who dare not set his foot on British
land: and if you think, that I could need protection, I have it in the
family of Devereux; nay, Devereux himself solicits to go with me; for he
has business not less urgent than mine is to adjust with that wretch,
who has had the effrontery to offer at a marriage with his sister. He
comes to England and goes back at once to save his sister, and shall I
do less to save a father? If Devereux thinks his name dishonoured by
that vile connection, have I not equal right to be as zealous to rescue
yours from that nefarious bond, and the disgraceful marriage that hangs
to it?--De Lancaster paused: He turned an approving look upon his
grandson: his cheek flushed, and the tear glistened in his eyes--Your
reasoning is unanswerable, he cried; your motive most commendable, my
child! but alas! I am too old to accompany you, and whilst you
demonstrate to me, that I ought to part from you, you convince me that I
could not live without you, and show me all the danger and the dread of
losing you. Besides, it is not me alone, whom the parting from you will
make wretched: there are hearts as weak, as tender and as fond as
mine--Think of our dear Cecilia, of your aunt! what will you say to her?
what to Amelia?

What I have said to you--To every one, that feels for my departure, my
honour and my duty form the plea, that I must urge for giving pain to
them, who are so dear to me: And surely, sir, there’s nothing so
alluring in the task, that I should covet it for other reasons, than
I’ve assigned to you. There must be something stronger than
self-indulgence, more imperious than the repugnance, which I feel at
heart, when I must force a sigh from you and them; and you of all men
living best can tell what that compulsion is--We must not be
dishonoured.

You have said it, De Lancaster replied; and now, my dear John, before we
proceed any further I hold it right and proper to send for our friend
Edward Wilson, and let him read your father’s letter without saying any
thing on the subject to bias his opinion. We shall then have his
sentiments upon the matter, and either be confirmed in our own judgment,
or perhaps hear from him what may induce us to reconsider it.

To this John of course most readily assented, and the message instantly
produced the man. De Lancaster put the letter into his hand, simply
desiring him to read it. Edward’s expressive countenance, whilst
perusing the contents, bespoke his sovereign contempt of the writer, and
was such a comment on the text as no one could mistake--Wretched,
wretched man! he cried. This is a degradation and disgrace not to him
only, but to human nature. We may pity weakness; we may find some plea
in the construction of a man for want of spirit and of manly feelings;
but this is such an act as even folly would not own, insanity would
blush for. Ah venerable sir, is this your son? ah my beloved John, is
this your father? sorry I am to speak with such contempt of one so near
to those, whom I respect and love. Forgive me, my good sir, it is my
zeal for you my patron, and for this my pupil, that has betrayed me into
this intemperance--But I’ll offend no further. This only you will suffer
me to say--He is De Lancaster, and must be saved. By whom, you’ll ask:
by whom but by his son? nature demands it; duty calls him forth; honour
imperiously compels him to it. But whilst the sacred trust that I still
hold, the solemn obligation, that still binds me to this beloved youth,
whose life is dearer to me than my own, gives me authority to speak
thus freely, I must insist upon my right to say, that wheresoever duty
carries him, it carries me. I know his virtues, sir; I know his ardour:
those I have nourished; that I have repressed, and studied to confine
within due bounds. If John embarks upon this filial errand, I throw
these clerical equipments off, and embark with him as my father’s son,
the son of Colonel Wilson; and if you consent to part from him, no power
on earth, your own excepted, shall withhold me from him.

Robert De Lancaster, who had kept his eyes fixed upon Wilson, whilst
thus descanting in a higher tone and with a vehemence, that till this
moment he never had given way to, now perceiving that he had brought his
speech to a conclusion, rose from his seat, and, taking him by the
hand, with great emotion said--Edward, I now with gratitude acknowledge,
that Heaven in you hath raised me up a friend to be the comforter of my
old age, and the upholder of my family in the person of my grandson,
whose mind you have enlightened by your precepts, and whose life you are
resolute to guard by your fortitude and friendship. When you had said of
my unhappy son--_He is De Lancaster and must be saved_, you had said
all. John must obey his duty; he must go, and I resign him to you.

Here he paused, for Colonel Wilson, entering the room, presented to him
his son Henry, now promoted to a majority of dragoons and under orders
to join his regiment. A finer person, and of more martial bearing, could
not greet the eyes of man or woman. His address to the De Lancaster of
ancient days was noble and respectful in the extreme: his brother he
dismissed with that kind of soldierly embrace, which is warmly bestowed,
but quickly dispatched. To John he turned, and measuring him with his
eye from heel to head, as if he had been surveying a recruit, he
exclaimed--May I believe my eyes? can this be John De Lancaster, whom I
have the honour to address?

    “Now in the name of all the gods at once,
    “Upon what food hath this our Cæsar fed,
    “That he is grown thus great?”

Here’s a De Lancaster, that shows fair promise to be a man indeed. Sir,
I entreat you; give me your hand, and give me, what I have an hereditary
right to ask, your friendship with it!

There it is, said John: I give it cordially with both my hands, and hope
to have your friendship in return.

This salutation being over, Henry Wilson addressed himself again to the
grandfather, and said--I felicitate you, honoured sir, upon this noble
scyon to your ancient stock. Look, if he does not over-top us all!
Edward and I are hardly fit to stand in the same file with him: we are
but summer soldiers: He may let the tempest blow, and bid defiance to
it.

I hope so, old De Lancaster replied, for he may chance to hear the
tempest blow where he is going. John and your brother Edward are for
Lisbon.

For Lisbon! cried the major; that is lucky: for Lisbon is my very
destination. If they are bound thither, and will let me join them, I
warrant I’ll keep pace upon the march to the sea side, and when we land
at Lisbon, I’ll engage that they shall find a welcome from some as
worthy and as gallant fellows, as ever yet drew breath.

Major, the good old man replied, I cannot tell you how I am delighted to
hear that you are going, who have served so long and with so much honour
in Portugal. You must be well acquainted with the country, and perhaps
may know a gentleman, who is returning with them to his friends at
Cintra, Devereux by name.

Devereux of Cintra! Henry exclaimed. Who knows not him, that ever passed
but half a day at Lisbon? I know him well, and have good cause to know
and honour him for his noble entertainment of me and many of my
army-friends. Devereux is rich in money, richer still in a good name,
and happy in a son, whom all men praise, and in a lovely daughter, whom
every body admires, but no one has presumption to address.

Yes, there is one, De Lancaster replied, who is as full of presumption
as he is void of merit. He now detailed not only the affair, that
brought young Devereux over to England, but the business, that called
his grandson out of it; and as he did this circumstantially and
minutely, after his manner, the old Colonel also listened to the long
but interesting narrative, though not without frequent grunts and
growlings of displeasure against poor Philip; till when the story
closed--Heaven have mercy on us, he exclaimed, that any man alive will
let himself be scared out of his small wits by a knavish rascal, a
pettifogging bragadocio fellow, half Jew and half attorney, and
forsooth because he comes with parchment and with pistol--’Sdeath, had I
been Philip, and six feet high as he is, I would have made the attorney
eat the parchment, and given the Jew the pistol for his breakfast:
’sblood, I would have laid the bond and baggage both upon the fire and
myself after them, or ever I would turn and nestle in a den with that
hyæna.

Never fear that, good father, Henry cried; there is a way of dealing
with hyænas, that makes them wondrous tame. If we three, and young
Devereux fourth fellow, are not enough for Madam Rachel and her Jewish
kindred, I have at hand a batch of special pleaders, who, without judge
or jury, will soon settle her business by a process of their own.

Come then, my friends, rejoined the good old man; let us dismiss the
subject for the present, and leave my grandson to discuss the point with
others of the family, who perhaps may scan this enterprize with more
alarm, than you, whose hearts no danger can appall. Our guest, young
Devereux, has been employed upon his letters; we’ll call him out, and
take a turn or two upon the terrace. The sun is pleasant, and though
mother nature begins to put her winter garments on, yet she looks
cheerful, and invites us forth.




CHAPTER IX.

_Our Hero imparts to Amelia Jones his Purpose of setting off for
Portugal._


When Mr. De Lancaster and the Wilsons had departed and left our hero
alone, his heart, which conversation and the flow of Major Wilson’s
spirits had upheld, now sunk within him, for it was not alone Cecilia’s
tender fears, Amelia’s sorrows threw a sadness over him. He knew that he
would find her with his aunt and Mrs. Jennings in their morning room;
but how to draw her from them and unburden his heart to her in private
was the question. He walked up to the gallery, with which their room
communicated, and in passing the door took care his steps upon the
dry-rubbed oaken floor should give a signal, that might reach the ear
of his beloved; it being now about the time for them to take their usual
walk together.

Hark! said Amelia; sure my ear deceives me, or that is Mr. John De
Lancaster, whom I hear in the gallery.

I believe your ear is very correct, said Cecilia; it is my nephew’s
step; but go out, my dear, and see: perhaps he wishes you to walk with
him this fine day. Mrs. Jennings and I will finish what we are about,
and postpone our walk till by-and-bye.

Amelia did not long delay to obey so pleasant an injunction. She sallied
from the room as quick as thought--I guessed that it was you, she cried,
as she went up to him, and held out her hand. Your aunt, who is all
kindness, sent me to you. If you like a walk, I am ready, ’Tis a
charming day.

Yes, and that voice is charming, he replied; that sweet inviting smile
enchants a heart, that fondly doats upon you: but we won’t walk, Amelia;
at least not yet; for I have news from Lisbon, from my father, not of a
pleasant sort I must confess: and if you will trust yourself with me in
this room, which is my study, and where nobody will interrupt us, I wish
to discourse with you upon it in private--They immediately entered the
room, and, being seated, John began as follows--

Amelia, it is my unhappy lot to have a father, who brings shame upon me,
and seems to feel none for himself; in whom, with sorrow I am forced to
say, I cannot trace one spark of manly resolution, or the sense of what
becomes a gentleman to feel. You, on the contrary, amongst the many
excellencies you possess, and I am wanting in, have the advantage also
to be born of parents, though now no more, of whom you may be justly
proud. Judge therefore, my Amelia, how incumbent it must be on me, whose
greatest ambition is to approve myself not quite unworthy of your
esteem, to support, as far as I am able, the credit of a name, which I
am presumptuous enough to hope you will one day condescend to share. My
father calls on me for my assistance; he conjures me to come and
extricate him from a disgraceful contract, fraudulent upon the face of
it, with those Ap Owens; which if I fail to do, he marries that detested
villain’s mother, insults the memory of your newly-buried friend, and
blasts a name, that never yet was stained.

Married! she cried; your father, and the son of that good man, whom
every one reveres, married so hastily, so rashly, so unworthily! It must
not be.

True, my Amelia. Look upon this relick, which gives the image of your
gallant father, and to which your piety allots that envied station
nearest to your heart; then, tell me, what would that brave hero say, if
I, aspiring to his daughter’s love, should scruple to obey the call of
honour: Would he not bid me go and save a father?

He was the friend, that upon such an errand would not have suffered you
to go forth alone.

And such a friend I have in Edward Wilson; he is resolved to bear me
company. Devereux returns with me, and in his house I find a family of
friends: Nay, my good fortune seems resolved to give me a host of
friends, for Henry, our old Colonel’s eldest son, whom in himself I may
account a host, is now upon his way to join his regiment in Lisbon, and
goes with us. Thus am I trebly furnished with companions. What has my
dear Amelia now to fear, if thus befriended, thus accompanied, and
sanctioned not by the consent alone, but the command of my good
grandfather, I go where duty calls me? Now, my angel!--And, saying this,
he clasped her in his arms. Where can thy gentle spirit apprehend one
distant chance of danger to alarm it? What can my lovely, my betrothed
Amelia, oppose to the necessity, painful although it is, of a short
absence from her?

Nothing; for the decree is absolute, and what am I but a devoted
creature whose heart is wholly your’s? Nothing remains for me to do, but
to return you my unbounded thanks for all your goodness, and especially
for condescending to impart these tidings, sad as they are, in this
considerate manner to me, who in your absence can expect to live but in
the hope that we shall meet again. I see, I know, I feel that we must
part.

Here her voice failing for a while she seemed quite overcome by sorrow,
till her tears relieved her; and at length, turning a look upon her
anxious lover, that spoke a conscious dignity of mind, she rose and
said--I am ashamed of this unworthy weakness. I know I ought not to
bewail, but greet, the opportunity, that does you honour. To deserve a
hero I must not show the softness of a child--Come, let us walk. I feel
assurance of a happy issue. When you go forth upon the summons of a
helpless father, I trust that Providence will be your guard: It were a
sin to doubt it--This said, she gave her hand to him, and smiled: He
pressed it to his heart, and thus, endeared each to the other in the
purest sense of virtue’s chaste affection, forth they went--

       *       *       *       *       *

I am ill at these descriptions: I confess it. Seventy years and seven,
with clouds that hang upon my setting sun, will chill the brain, that
should devise scenes and descriptions warm with youthful love. Still the
chaste maiden and the prudent wife shall turn these leaves with no
revolting hand, nor blush for having read them. The friend of man will
find no fault with me for having given a dark shade here and there upon
my canvass to set off and contrast the brighter tints and nobler
attributes of human nature. Whether in novel, drama or in poem, I love
the mirror, that presents mankind in amiable lights; nor can I think
that frowns or wrinkles are a mark of wisdom; or that asperity becomes
the face of critic or philosopher.

Whilst I write this, my grandson, a brave youth, of six years service in
the royal navy, born, as I vainly hoped, to grace my name, and
recompense the cares, that I bestowed upon his education, lies (as
’twere before me) dead and as yet unburied: Whilst I not only mourn his
loss, but feel his wrongs, of which the world must hear, if the appeal,
that he had made to justice, is cut short by his untimely death.

Where then can a heart-wounded man, like me, find comfort but with that
beloved daughter, to whom I gave the memoirs of my life, and who still
lives to cheer its short remains? To her I dedicate this humble work;
for these repeated testimonies of my love, are all the inheritance I can
bequeath her, all my hard fortune hath not wrested from me.


                        END OF THE FIRST BOOK.




                           BOOK THE SECOND.




CHAPTER I.

_Morgan of Glen Morgan arrives at Kray Castle._


The preparations, requisite for John De Lancaster’s departure,
necessarily involved a delay of some two or three days, and every hand,
as well as every heart, was occupied in that interesting business. The
cheerfulness of Major Wilson kept up the spirits of the ladies, except
upon one occasion, when he launched out so vehemently in his description
of Miss Devereux’s charms, that, if he had not been so wholly taken up
with his subject, he might have discovered one countenance at least in
the circle of his hearers, that was not much enlivened by his raptures.

In the afternoon a messenger from Glen Morgan arrived with the following
letter addressed to Colonel Wilson--

          “Dear Colonel,

     “My gout has left me, and if he never troubles me with his company
     again, he has my free leave to keep away. I meditate to take
     advantage of his absence, and pay a visit to my good brother at the
     castle before his dinner hour to-morrow, _Deo volente_. I shall
     bring my live-lumber Mother Richards in the coach with me, as her
     small wits just serve her to descant with due precision upon warm
     nightcaps and a well-aired bed: she will pester the poor folks in
     the castle with her clack, but I shall profit by her care; and you
     know there is not a more selfish fellow living than your humble
     servant. As my rascally passion for hoarding money has no longer
     any object, since you won’t help me off with any of my savings, I
     shall tack two more dog horses to my scurvy team, and come in state
     like Sir Francis Wronghead, with Giles Joulter riding postillion:
     the cattle will get a belly-full in De Lancaster’s stables, and
     that is what they don’t often meet with in their own. I have bought
     a flaming fine watch of a pedling Jew, which I dare say won’t go;
     but it will do for Amelia Jones, if she behaves well, and does not
     slight me for that puppy John, for whom I do not care a rush, as
     you well know, having lived in solitude till I am unfit for
     society, and as cold at heart as the top of a Welch mountain. I am
     very glad my brother Lancaster has so much abated of his learned
     dissertations, for I have no reading beyond that of a trumpery
     story book, and am in as profound a state of blessed ignorance, as
     any gentleman in Wales can boast of. Yet Robert surely is an
     incomparable man; his honour is so nice, his nature so divine, that
     I am almost ready to adore him till he talks Greek, and then it’s
     over with me; I know no more of the matter than a blind man does of
     colours.

     “Your son Edward is the very _beauty of holiness_: he not only does
     faithful service to religion by the strong reasoning powers of his
     mind, but renders it lovely by the gracefulness of his manners. My
     spiritual pastor and teacher takes quite as much care of his own
     body, as he does of my soul: he is silent at his meals, but loud in
     talk and positive in argument, when he has satisfied his craving:
     He can’t keep his temper at backgammon, when the dice go against
     him; yet if I ever slip out a hard word, as we soldiers are too apt
     to do, he takes up their cause at once and sermonizes against
     swearing. I don’t think this is quite fair; for he swallows his
     oaths out of compliment to his cloth, and I from the habits of mine
     make it a point of honour to say nothing behind a gentleman’s back
     that I won’t say before his face. One day by chance he had not
     dined with me, and I sent to him to come and read the evening
     prayers to my crew of sinners as usual; for which, by the way, I
     pay him an annual stipend: He sent for answer it was not his custom
     to turn out after dinner; he has never had it in his power to make
     that excuse again, and of course has regularly lulled dame Richards
     and the old butler to sleep with his soporiferous homily as surely
     as the evening comes. I do not think there is in existence a worse
     enemy to edification than metheglin.

     “Lord have mercy on me, what a household of idlers do I keep! I
     would make a total reform in my family, if I could flatter myself
     that I should live to reap the benefit of it; but that is not upon
     the chances, and I am such a lazy blockhead, so mere a caput
     mortuum, that I let them work their own will, and am content to lie
     at my length, like Sampson’s lion, for the bees to make honey in my
     carcase.

     “You must be sure to lay me at the feet of the divine Cecilia; for,
     if you don’t do it for me, I can’t do it for myself: I am quite as
     inflexible as the wax-work in Fleet-street; attempt to bend me, and
     I break asunder. I am absolutely good for nothing, and I dare say
     the gout only left me because there was no credit to be got by
     killing me: That same _podagra_ is a purse-proud sycophant, and if
     he stoop to kiss your toe, were you the pope himself, he will make
     you pay dear for the compliment.

     “I suppose you wonder why I write to you so long a letter--so do I;
     but though it wearies you with nonsense, it winds up with a truth,
     when I profess myself your cordial friend

                      and faithful servant

                         JOHN MORGAN.”

When this letter had been read to De Lancaster, joy brightened in his
hospitable countenance: his orders circulated through the Castle for all
things and all people to be put in order to pay proper honours to his
expected visitor. He commented with great good humour upon some
passages in the letter, that seemed to strike his fancy--Though the good
man, he said, is so shy of what he calls my learned disquisitions, I
believe it is only a copy of his countenance, for in fact he is no mean
scholar; but we will muzzle the learned languages, and trust to nothing
but our mother tongue; so take notice, my good Colonel, you will incur
heavy penalties if you give us any of your heathen Greek, whilst my
brother Morgan is in the house.

And if I do when he is out of it, replied the Colonel, I’ll give you
leave to hang me.

The next morning when the sun turned out upon the mountain tops, so did
the whole Castle garrison from their sky-chambers on the turret tops,
and gave cheerful note of preparation--Not indeed by _the armourers
accomplishing the knights_, but by the warders and liverymen brushing
up their orange tawnies, and by the squeaking of the pigs and quacking
of ducks, that came unwillingly to be killed and roasted, whilst the
mute inhabitants of the waters resigned themselves to their fate without
a murmur.

When the family assembled in the breakfast-room, the Colonel appeared in
his uniform, not quite in its first bloom, nor altogether in the last
cut of the fashion; whilst Major Wilson, bright as bullion could make
him, was perfectly caparisoned for court or camp. This ceremonious kind
of etiquette, now thought troublesome and thrown by as obsolete, was
understood by the family of Kray Castle as an acceptable attention to
the good old lord of the soil upon certain gala days, when he was
anxious to receive a visitor with particular respect.

When the approach of Morgan of Glen Morgan was descried from the castle
windows, and the green and red liveries began to show their colours in
the sunbeams, the alarm bell sounded, the servants mustered in the
gothic hall, and David Williams seated himself on his tripod. Coaches
were not made, as they are now, to accommodate the horses that draw
them, but with due regard to the ease and safety of the company, who
were conveyed in them. Old Morgan of course made his landing good, and
found himself in the arms of his venerable host, surrounded by his
friends, all emulous to greet him with a welcome.

As he leant upon the arms of De Lancaster and his grandson in his
passage through the hall, he stopped and looked about him--This is
wonderful, he cried; this is above hope, that I should find myself once
more under the protection of these hospitable lares. Alas, when I had
the honour of your company at Glen-Morgan, I little thought of making
any other visit but to the place, from which no traveller returns.
Providence has decreed it otherwise--Well, well, well! a man must have a
stubborn heart, that could not find some cause to be thankful, when a
blessing, such as I am now enjoying is vouchsafed to him. Take notice,
brother De Lancaster, I understand my own unworthiness too well to
intrude upon Heaven’s mercy with many petitions, but I hope I am not
altogether deficient in my thanksgivings. He then addressed himself to
some of the old domestics, as he passed them, and particularly to David
Williams, whom he greeted cordially and with much respect.

When he entered the drawing-room he turned to Cecilia and said--I now
consider myself within the territory and under the command of the most
amiable lady living. I shall add no grace to you, madam, as a courtier,
but as a subject none can be more loyal. In this manner he paid his
compliments round the circle, reserving his last and most affectionate
address for his grandson, who, having risen from his seat, whilst his
grandfather was speaking to him, when he had concluded, went up to him,
and bending his knee, took his hand to kiss it. The action was
irresistably affecting, and the old man fell upon his neck and wept. The
stillness and silence of the company whilst this was passing made the
scene more awful and impressive: At length the good old man, rallying
his spirits, thus addressed his grandson--I know, my child, that you
are going out of England; therefore it is I am come to take my leave of
you; I also know your motive to be truly filial, and of course agree
entirely with your worthy grandfather in approving of your undertaking.
It is your duty, it is your point of honour, and you have no choice but
to obey. Being a selfish pitiful kind of fellow, perhaps I was a little
shaken, when I heard of it; so to put myself in heart again, I gave out
marching orders, and penned a pacquet to my old comrade the Colonel, in
which I did not treat him with one word of common sense. Now therefore,
John, I am come for other purposes than to whine and whimper, because
forsooth you are going to make a short excursion in good and gallant
company, where I wish I was going with you: but as I can’t do that, I
come to see you and your comrades start, and after you are gone drink to
your good voyage in a glass of old Madeira, and perhaps if my good
friend here is not tired of my dull company, I may intrude upon his
hospitality, and wait till you return.

Say you so? cried De Lancaster: then I pronounce you to be the kindest
friend and the noblest ancient Briton, that draws the breath of life on
this side of the Wye--Now tell old David to strike up a welcome in his
best bravura.




CHAPTER II.

_Treats of what passed at Kray Castle in the Evening of the Day before
John De Lancaster’s Departure._


The dinner was not only elegant but sumptuous. Sir Arthur Floyd and two
or three more neighbours of respectability had dropped in most
opportunely to complete the party and divert the conversation from
domestic topics.

When the ladies had retired, and the glass gone gaily round, Morgan
desired to be heard upon a matter of some consequence. Gentlemen, he
said, I reside as you well know, in the near neighbourhood of Denbigh,
and I have had notice given me by the corporation of that borough, that
their worthy representative is at the point of death. I never cultivated
any interest there, and have no great property either in or about the
place. Nevertheless in their free good will to me, (though for what one
merit on my part they bear me that good will neither they nor I can
guess) they offer to elect the friend, whom I shall recommend. They wish
my grandson De Lancaster was of age to represent them, as they hold him
high in honour for the generous part he took in poor Ap Rees’s
melancholy case. I thanked them, but had nobody in my view. As they were
anxious to mark their abhorrence of a certain young baronet, who had
been soliciting their support, this answer of mine did not satisfy them,
but they would needs have me refer myself to my brother-in-law Mr. De
Lancaster, now in the chair beside me; which of course I promised to do,
and now fulfil my word. This I stated to him in a few words before
dinner, and had his permission to call upon him, as I now do, for his
answer.

I have not a moment’s hesitation, De Lancaster replied, what to answer;
for in the person of my friend Sir Arthur Floyd, luckily here present, I
recognize every quality, that can constitute a character at all points
worthy of their choice--an active magistrate, an honourable gentleman, a
loyal subject, an able incorrupt and independent senator.

Before the baronet could reply, a joyous shout from our young hero John,
followed by a general plaudit of hands, seemed to leave Sir Arthur
without the power of recollection, or the privilege of choice.

At length he rose, and, after bowing to Mr. De Lancaster and the
company, he said--I have occasion to know, that the unworthy nephew,
(with whose name I will not stain my lips) of a worthy baronet lately
deceased, had pointed his ambition and directed all his resources to the
attainment of this object, now so unexpectedly and beyond my hopes
proposed to me, and seconded by an applause, that must ever follow what
that gentleman says, even when he deigns to take so humble an individual
as myself for his subject. But as I have hitherto been known as of the
party and politics of that person before alluded to, now become so
abandoned and so despicable, I will on no account accept the support of
any one voter for the borough of Denbigh, until it is clearly and
distinctly ascertained in the most public manner, that I offer myself
upon principles directly opposite to those of that expatriated villain,
(I can call him nothing less,) and that I put my honour and my pledge
into the hands of Mr. De Lancaster, as my friend, my sponsor and my
patron.

This handsome declaration produced a second and a louder applause, and
that called up Sir Arthur Floyd once more from his seat to return his
thanks to the company and at the same time to remind them of their duty
to the ladies, humbly proposing, with Mr. De Lancaster’s permission, an
adjournment to the drawing-room: upon which gallant and well-timed
appeal, the company with prompt obedience rose, and left the table.

This was the time when every one was solicitous to approach and pay
their homage to Cecilia De Lancaster; here, like Cato’s daughter, she
presided--

    “Whilst winning mildness and attractive smiles
    “Dwelt in her eyes, and with becoming grace
    “Softened the rigor of her father’s virtue--”

On one side of her sate the sage preceptress of the young and blooming
Amelia, who, on the other side, assisted in the elegant ministration of
those lady-like offices, which it was not then the custom to transfer to
a domestic. The refreshments of the tea-table came recommended to our
lips from the fair hands of the lady president, who delicately
distinguished every person’s right, and without confusion of property
guarded his exclusive cup, and faithfully returned it to the owner: Now
some snuffy hectick house-keeper huddles all together, and
indiscriminately serves out the messes, hot or cold, strong or weak, as
chance directs, to be handed round the room for those, who chuse to try
their luck in a lottery of hot water, very little better than poor
Timon’s dinner to his disappointed parasites.

As soon as this ceremony was over the folding doors of the drawing-room
were thrown open, and David Williams, led by his son bearing his harp,
and in his habit of office, entered and took the post prepared for him:
he paused and reached out his hand to the seat beside him, as if waiting
for some one else. When immediately old Robin Ap Rees in a mourning vest
with black crape sleeves to the elbows only, and bound about his waist
with a sash of the same stuff, but without medal, or any professional
badge, that could mark him as the bard of the Ap Owens, approached and
made a profound obeisance in the door-way. Upon his appearing every
heart was touched: his tall spare figure, drooping head and shrivelled
arms, with the pale hue of his woe-stricken visage, might have softened
the iron heart of Gallia’s savage tyrant; can we then wonder if the
generous bosoms of those assembled felt that soft impression, which
Nature’s poet terms _the every dint of pity_?

John, who alone was in the secret of his coming, had whispered Amelia
and his aunt to prepare themselves for his appearance. He now rose, and
took the blind bard by the hand to lead him to his seat, when, upon his
grandfather beginning to speak, he stopped, and whilst Ap Rees turned
respectfully towards the voice that addressed him, Mr. De Lancaster
delivered himself as follows--

My good old friend, and favourite of the Muse, to whom I am beholden for
so many tuneful hours, it is now with mixed sensations of satisfaction
and sorrow, that I greet you with a welcome, and assure you that the
friendship and protection, which my grandson shows you, have my warmest
approbation and most cordial concurrence. Your worthiness, your genius,
your afflictions claim his compassionate regard and care. I take this
visit, that you pay us on the eve of his departure, as a tribute of your
esteem, which I am persuaded has cost you some painful efforts to pay,
and which I am not less satisfied is considered and appretiated by him
as it ought to be. I see you have brought your harp, and my minstrel
David Williams, who honours and admires you, will gladly either take a
part with you, where the strain allows of it, or listen to you with
delight, if you rather wish to treat us with some melody of your own.

Respected sir, Ap Rees replied, my natural wish would be to edify in
silence, whilst my superior (such I am conscious Mr. Williams is)
exhibited that excellence, which has no rival; in me at least that rival
is not found. But, Sir, there stands beside me one--would I could see
him!--an exalted being, endowed by nature with such blessed properties,
that, but to guess at what he wishes done and not to do it, would be in
me, who live upon his bounty, and may be said almost to breathe his air,
a sin of such ingratitude as yet no name is found for, and I hope no
instance ever will occur to put invention to that lamentable test. Your
grandson, Heaven preserve him, willed me to string my tuneless harp
afresh, and second Mr. Williams in a strain, melodiously adapted to the
words which he will chaunt.

To this of course the assent was universal. The sightless brethren put
their harps in time: Ap Rees enriched the strain with his harmonious
chords, whilst Williams led and sung, as here ensues--

    “Fearless of danger, I prepare to roam
    O’er seas, whose angry billows rage and foam;
    An amulet there is, that guards my breast,
    Whose power can charm the loudest storm to rest.

    It is the image of my darling maid,
    An image by no mortal hand pourtray’d;
    Love, the great master, grav’d it on my heart,
    And, ere time mars it, life and I must part.

    Is it for loss of me that I descry
    That tearful cherub in my fair-one’s eye?
    Believe it, Love, we part to meet again,
    And purchase years of bliss with hours of pain.

    Full well I know what title he must prove,
    Whose hope aspires to gain an angel’s love;
    Therefore I go, though fond affection pleads,
    Where duty warns me, and where honour leads.

    Farewell to all that’s good and all that’s dear!
    Vice hath no pow’r that Virtue ought to fear:
    Link’d to my home, whatever course I take,
    The chain may lengthen, but can never break.”

If our hero John was, as I suspect, the author of these lines, it is
plain he was more in love with his mistress, than his muse was with her
poet: But young men are very apt to scratch, when the itch of scribbling
is upon them.




CHAPTER III.

_Our Hero takes his Departure from Kray Castle._


Amelia, who had counted every hour during a sleepless melancholy night,
rose with the break of day, and light of foot, though with a heavy
heart, flitted along the gallery in the dusk, and gently tapping at the
chamber door, where John and she had mutually agreed to pass a parting
hour, was instantly admitted by her lover, accoutered for his journey.

Of this scene I must decline to attempt a description. I could say
nothing new to such of my readers, who know by experience how
exquisitely pure those feelings are, which virtuous love inspires; and
on such, as have not that experience, my labour would be lost. In short
it was an interview between two young persons, firmly affianced and
fondly attached to each other, and how delicately that must pass, which
honour conducts on one part, and innocence on the other, there needs no
ghost to tell us.

In the breakfast-room the whole family were assembled. In the
countenances of the several parties any man of common sagacity might
have read the several feelings. Old De Lancaster struggled hard to
maintain a firm and dignified tranquillity, and if he did at any time
betray symptoms of occasional embarrassment, it was only to show that
his philosophy did not absolutely desert him. The person, whose thoughts
seemed to be most disengaged, was the gallant Major, who just then had
the most to do; for the ordering and arranging of the whole cavalcade
had been assigned over to him, and the alacrity, with which he executed
his authority over men, horses and carriages, left him no time for those
tender sentiments and concerns, that seemed to occupy every body else.
Life and spirit animated him; silence and sadness dwelt on all the rest.

Here was an opportunity for an orator to avail himself of, and an
audience to his heart’s content most happily disposed to hear him: but
Mr. De Lancaster let it go by for reasons no doubt best known to
himself. He did indeed take occasion to impart a few words to Edward
Wilson when he came into the room; but they were only for his private
ear. The ladies kept their station in the back ground, and as much out
of sight as they could contrive. Devereux had very sensibly committed
his adieus to paper, and left them in the hands of Mr. De Lancaster’s
servant to be delivered to him at his better leisure. At length Major
Wilson in a sprightly tone announced all ready; Devereux’s travelling
coach was first at the door, and appointed to lead; himself with John
and the two Wilsons were by the major’s order billeted upon it; our hero
halted a few minutes, after his companions had taken leave, to bid
farewell to the beloved objects of his duty and affection; after which,
having presented himself at the door of the coach, where his three
friends were already seated, he made his parting acknowledgments to the
crowd, who were invoking blessings in his behalf; and passed the outward
gate of the castle with those sensations and in that kind of triumph,
which only virtue can deserve, and gratitude alone bestow.

When Colonel Wilson, who had gone to the hall-door with his sons,
returned to the breakfast-room, the ladies had departed, and he found
the two grandfathers left in silent sadness to themselves. De Lancaster
was in a meditative posture, with his elbow rested on the arm of his
chair, and his head reclined upon his hand. Poor old Morgan was wetting
a crust of bread with his tears, whilst he was mumbling it with his
teeth. When he had pretty nearly settled the controversy between
swallowing, coughing and choaking, he turned a look upon Wilson, and
said--

Brother soldier, there is nothing in this world, for which I so much
envy you as for that piece of wood, that you wear as a supplement to
your composition, and is one part of you at least, which is totally
devoid of feeling. I always knew you were what we call heart of oak, but
I did not till now know that you had an oaken heart. Look at me. Did you
ever see such a blubbering beast as I have made of myself? By the life
of me, Wilson, you are a fine gay fellow, and can have neither water in
your head, nor water at your heart, else methinks you would have pumped
up some of it upon this occasion. May I perish, if I don’t suspect you
have got an hydrophobia in your eyes: at least, I am sure you will
never die of Niobe’s disease--all tears.

I hope not, Colonel Wilson replied; yet to such tears as you shed I
cannot object, forasmuch as they convince me I was not mistaken, when I
set you down as a very tender-hearted man, though you was pleased to
represent yourself as something without any heart at all. When I now
find you weeping without cause; what would you do, if you had cause?
Why, man, you would drown yourself in tears. Old fellows like me rarely
out-live old habits, let them live as long as they may. I have been a
poor soldier at the command of other people, and bandied up and down,
all my life long. If I had wit enough to understand my duty, I never
wanted will to undertake it; in this light I look upon this trip of your
grandson’s as a call of duty made upon him by his father, who according
to the laws of nature is properly his commanding officer, though Heaven
know he is as little proper for a command as any non-effective officer
can be, though you rummaged the whole shelf to search for him. And now
give me leave, my good friend, to ask you, whether you lament over his
absence because he is out upon his duty, or because he can’t go there
and stay here at one and the same time. Convince me only that he went
away from us when he might honourably have staid at home, and I will own
you have good reason to lament his absence. In the mean time I confess
to you that I do not conceive our dear John De Lancaster to be more in
the way of danger upon this expedition, and with those friends, than he
would be on his horse’s back on a chace after a paltry fox, which it is
no part of his duty to pursue, nor any proof of his merit to overtake.

Whilst the Colonel had been thus haranguing, Mr. De Lancaster had
shifted his meditative posture, and paid attention to what was passing:
He now took up the argument, and replied--Enough said, my good Colonel,
enough said! You have a right to argue for duty, having yourself
uniformly obeyed and fulfilled it, as an officer and a gentleman. My
brother Morgan does not want to be convinced that his grandson is gone
upon an honourable errand; but you are well aware, that the painful and
enfeebling illness, with which he has been visited, will naturally shake
even the firmest and the bravest spirit.

In my own particular I am not a man prone to shed tears: If I were, I
confess to you, Colonel Wilson, I should be sooner thrown into the
melting mood by the contemplation of a generous act, or noble sentiment,
than by the pathos of a tragedy, or the pity-moving lamentations of a
desponding lover, or a whining mendicant.

A servant now delivered the letter Devereux had left for Mr. De
Lancaster, who read as follows.--

              “Sir,

     “The hospitality and kindness I have experienced at Kray-Castle
     have made an impression on my mind, that can never be obliterated.
     The purposes of my coming to England have been completely obtained,
     and I am now returning to my family fully armed with evidence, not
     only to rescue them from any chance of a disgraceful connection,
     but also prepared to co-operate with your amiable grandson and his
     friends in their measures for averting the like disgrace from you
     and your respectable and ancient house. Believe me, Sir, this will
     be a task, that can involve no representative of your’s in either
     difficulty or danger; for I can confidently assure you that upon my
     father’s statement of the case to the minister of Portugal, that
     court will not permit a fugitive from the laws of his country, more
     especially a British subject, to avail himself of its protection
     for escaping with impunity; much less will it be allowed him to
     enforce a bond illegally obtained for purposes the most
     inadmissible and outrageously unfair.

     “As I have sent letters to announce our coming, I am sure my father
     and friends will be on the shore to receive Mr. John De Lancaster
     upon his landing, and will immediately conduct him and his whole
     party to our house in Lisbon, where no attention will be omitted,
     that can mark their sensibility of the abundant favours I have
     received from you and your’s, which must ever be remembered with
     the utmost gratitude by him, who is with profound respect, Sir,

                       your much obliged and
                       most devoted servant,
                                GEORGE FREDERICK DEVEREUX.”




CHAPTER IV.

_Our Hero arrives at Lisbon. Is hospitably received by the Father of
young Devereux; accompanies him to his House: What there occurs is
related._


We must now attend upon the travellers, to whom no circumstance occurred
upon their journey worth relating, and who, after an expeditious and
safe voyage, with fair wind and favourable weather, dropped anchor in
the Tagus, and were quickly visited by Mr. Devereux the father, who came
on board, whilst his barge and rowers, handsomely appointed, waited
alongside.

Upon the first sight of this gentleman, John De Lancaster eagerly
enquired for his father, and why he did not come off from the shore: the
answer was that his situation just then did not admit of it.

He is ill, said De Lancaster.

Indeed he is far from well, rejoined the other.

May I not go off to him directly?

The officers of health are on board, said Mr. Devereux; but I have
obtained leave to bring you on shore directly: Your friends however and
servants must put up with a short detention, till certain forms are
dispensed with. John De Lancaster, conducted by Mr. Devereux,
immediately went over the ship’s side, and the barge pushed off for the
landing-place.

Tell me, I conjure you, sir, said our hero, the truth without reserve,
in what situation I am to find my father, and believe me, Mr. Devereux,
whatever that may be, though I have a heart to feel it as a son, I trust
I have a proper sense of my duty to meet the dispensation as I ought.

Your father is not dead, Devereux replied, although I must not disguise
from you that his life is despaired of. He has been infamously treated,
and, as it is presumed, unfairly wounded, either by some hired assassin
or by Sir David Ap Owen, with whom the unhappy gentleman, it seems, had
been induced to trust himself, and turn out alone to settle their
differences by a duel. This is all we can at present collect of an
affair, that has a very black appearance. Suspicion is strong against Ap
Owen, who has absconded, and the ministers of justice are sent out in
all directions after him. He is not yet discovered; and your poor
father, who is now attended by his surgeons in my house, I am sorry to
say, is in no capacity of giving us any information, his senses being
totally deranged.

To this De Lancaster for a few minutes was in no condition to make
answer, but put up his hand to his eyes, and suffered grief to overpower
him. The barge now approached the landing place, where Devereux’s
carriage was in waiting. Our hero rallied his spirits, landed from the
barge with an assumed composure, took his seat in the coach, and soon
found himself at the door of a magnificent house in the great square,
that opens to the river.

Ushered by his friendly host through a noble hall, John De Lancaster
ascended the stairs, and cautiously entered the chamber, where his
father was lying on a couch, at the side of which a young lady was
standing, who made a sign for him to stop. It was the daughter of Mr.
Devereux, and by the faint light, that was admitted into the chamber,
the elegance of her form struck on the instant with such a resemblance
to the image ever present to his mind, that in the agitation of the
moment the words involuntarily escaped him in a murmur loud enough for
her to hear--Heaven defend me, is it my Amelia, or some sister angel,
that I see?--Alas, she said, ’twould be an angel’s office to afford you
comfort; for human help I fear is all in vain--He bowed, and approached
the couch.

A death-like insensibility, though not death itself, seemed to have
locked up all the vital powers of the unhappy object, which to behold,
now chilled the filial heart of our afflicted hero. He took his father’s
hand, and turning to the lady by his side--It is not absolutely cold, he
said, nor is his pulse quite gone. If I could waken him from this morbid
trance, and get him once to turn his eyes upon me, I think that he would
know me.

Try it, she said; and speak to him. Perhaps your voice may rouse him:
Our’s have no effect.

Father! he cried, my father, do you hear me? I am your son. I am come
to visit you; to comfort you, to avenge you. Look on me; recollect me!
it is I; ’tis John De Lancaster, who speaks to you.

The filial voice awakened him; the animating call stayed the emancipated
spirit, even in the act of parting on its flight, and Death, at Nature’s
privileged appeal still to be heard, forbore to stop the pulses of the
heart, and gave the reinstated senses once more use of their suspended
functions.

When Maria Devereux saw this, she exclaimed--He lives; he stirs! Let in
more light, that he may see his son.

The dying father had now unclosed his eyes, and the wild ghastly stare,
with which at first he fixed them on his son, as his mind gained its
recollecting power, softened, and by degrees assumed a look, indicative
of that intelligence, that gleam of satisfaction and delight, which in
his mercy God sometimes vouchsafes, when he releases his afflicted
creatures, and calls them to his peace from persecution and a world of
woe.

At length a voice, yet audible, exclaimed--My son, my son! I see you,
hear you: You are come to close your father’s eyes--May Heaven reward
you for it! Ah John, John, I am murdered, basely murdered.--Here he
checked, and straggled hard for words. At length he faintly cried, Reach
me a cordial; let me wet my throat, and I’ll relate it to you.

Maria, who stood ready on the watch, quickly presented him the cordial
draught. He made signs to be raised up in his couch: It was providently
so constructed as to effect what he wished for without disturbance of
his person, or alteration of his posture. The fair hand, that brought
it, lifted it to his lips; (it is to female feeling and compassion that
we must look for offices like these in our last moments.) Philip felt
the kindness--Bless you! he cried, and drank what she bestowed to the
last drop: the comfort, that it gave him, was immediate: his eyes, which
now he turned upon his son, appeared to brighten, and he thus addressed
him--

Oh! now I see you clearly and distinctly: now I perceive that power is
mercifully granted me to recollect and tell you my sad story. I will be
brief however, for I feel that this reprieve is only for a time: Now
listen therefore, and record my words--When that Ap-Owen, that atrocious
villain, heard you were coming over, he called upon me, and with furious
threats demanded of me instantly to wed the base-born woman, whom he
calls his mother, or satisfy the bond. ’Twas then, though much too late,
I recollected what was due from a De Lancaster, and shortly told him
that his threats were vain; I would do neither: I abhorred a duel, as he
well knew, but I would sooner die than stain my name, and stoop to such
extortion and disgrace. He raved; he swore, and foamed like one
possessed: he sprung upon me, and aimed to seize my throat; I grappled
with him, and hurled him on the floor. He rose, and drew his sword; I
had drawn mine the whilst in my defence, and my blood boiled within me.
Coward, I cried, assassin, I defy you! Here, or elsewhere, I am ready on
the moment.--Then follow me, he said, and in a spot, where I’ll conduct
you, not two furlongs off, we’ll settle our dispute. I followed him,
unthinking as I was; for he had galled me past my power to bear; and in
a grove, as I was entering it, some one from behind gave me a blow, that
felled me to the ground: There as I lay, but not deprived of sense, the
inhuman monster, the unmanly coward, rushed on me as I was in act to
rise; and thrust me through the body with his sword: he fled, and left
the murderous weapon in me: I bled profusely; could not call for help,
nor raise myself from off the ground; I fainted, and thenceforward
cannot account how time has passed, till now that I revive to see you
and that beauteous form, that sweet benevolence, that gave me drink; and
I suppose, is she, whom my dead wife wished you to marry; and, if you
are married, may Heaven confirm my blessing on you both.--Ah, I relapse
again; all, all is past--farewell for ever.--

This said, his head collapsed upon his shoulder; his eye-lids dropped;
he strove convulsively to grasp the clothes that were upon him; his
bosom heaved as if about to burst, and one deep sigh, the last he drew,
released his struggling spirit, and left him outstretched at his utmost
length, a lifeless corpse.




CHAPTER V.

_A further Account of what occurred at Lisbon after John De Lancaster’s
Arrival at that Place._


Such was the melancholy end of Philip, son of old De Lancaster, and
father of our hero. Heaven endowed him with moderate faculties, and
indolence conspired to make that little less. The place, which he left
vacant in the list of the De Lancasters from earliest time, was scarcely
less a chasm whilst he lived, than now when he was dead. Yet weak and
dormant as his spirit was, repeated aggravations from Ap Owen roused him
at last, and in the moment of his unguarded courage he fell into an
artful villain’s snare and was destroyed.

The memoirs of poor Philip’s life would hardly fill a page; but the
reflections, that might be deduced from his untimely death would be a
lesson of useful warning to those listless idlers, those noneffectives
in creation’s roll, who seem destined to live for no worthier purpose,
except to turn that vital air to waste, which might have fed the lungs
of nobler beings, who either patiently employ their hours over the
midnight lamp in learned toil; or, by their country called to
unwholesome climes, where the extremes of heat or cold are fatal, go
forth and die by thousands.

Still nature pleaded to the filial heart of John De Lancaster--That
mangled corpse, on which you look, gave life to you, and was your
father--Keenly he felt the appeal, and, whilst his eyes dwelt on the
piteous object, the big tears rolled down his cheeks: nor could he quite
abstain from exclamation, or keep his fiery spirit in command, whilst
the last words his dying father uttered still sounded in his
ears--Never, he cried, bear witness for me, Nature! will I revisit my
beloved home, till I have obtained, or executed, justice on the villain,
the out-lawed enemy of God and man, who did this murderous deed. This is
the second corpse, that he has made, and sent the immortal spirit to
arraign him at Heaven’s tribunal. Dreadful wretch, what must the torment
of his conscience be.

Whilst these or words like these, burst from his lips, as still he
stood, alone, contemplating the dismal scene, Edward, the younger
Wilson, came behind him, and embracing him, whilst he spake--Bear up, he
cried: remember God allows these trials to improve and exercise our
virtue: every sorrow, that may fall on us by his dispensation, may be
converted to our use and profit. And now, if what I say required a proof
how prompt his justice is, I have it for you--The criminal is seized and
in your hands--Aye! that is right: address your praise to Heaven! there
fix your thoughts, and cease to mourn for him, whose cause is heard,
whose injuries are redressed--But you shall have the matter as it
passed.

After you left the ship Devereux obtained intelligence that Owen had
been traced, and was suspected to have got on board a certain vessel,
which he pointed out, then lying near us, bound to the Western Isles,
and ready for a start. The man, who told him this, came from the shore,
and was apprised, that orders had been out to search for him, and seize
him on suspicion of murder. Upon this information instantly Devereux
with Henry and myself, well armed, took to the boat (the master of the
pacquet freely granting it) and in a few minutes, claiming our right of
search, we were admitted; and rushing to the cabin, there discovered
Owen, who, though disguised in the apparel of a common sailor, made no
attempt to contradict our charge, such was his terror on the sight of
us, and his surprise exceeding all description. We told him that our
errand was to seize him--What had he done?--What you must answer for
with your life, we replied. Murdered a noble gentleman, your countryman,
your friend, Philip De Lancaster.--Is he then dead? he cried, and
started with horror, trembling and ghastly pale.--Two or three of the
by-standers instantly exclaimed--He’s guilty, he confesses it: Away with
him! He sunk down on his chair, and hid his eyes. My brother now
addressed him by his name, and said--Sir David Owen, you must come with
us. The laws demand you. You know both who I am, and what I am: A Major
in the King of England’s army serving in Portugal; and in the right of
that commission I arrest you as his subject, on the charge of murder;
and I am sure, none in this vessel will attempt to stop me in the due
execution of my duty.

None, cried the Captain; pass! Let all stand clear! ’Twas then we saw,
in the behaviour of that wretched man, how abject guilt can be: That
insolence, which I have witnessed, now was sunk into despondency, and
but that pity would in me have been almost a crime, I could have pitied
him, when in a melancholy tone, he said--I am your prisoner. Misery
beyond mine, man cannot suffer. You have known me, Major Wilson, in
better days: I am a gentleman; at least I have been such: Don’t let your
people use me ill, I pray you--He was at this time in so helpless a
state, that we were obliged to have him lifted into the boat. Henry
gave orders to be rowed to the shore: A considerable party of his
officers and men were there discovered waiting for his landing: When we
approached, they cheered him, and as soon as he had set his foot on
shore, the air again rang with their shouts--Comrades! he cried, as they
were crowding round us, you will stifle us with your kindness: Form a
circle, and give us air; don’t you perceive the prisoner is fainting? He
caused his soldiers instantly to make a kind of military litter by
taking hands, and in this manner they bore off the wretched criminal by
his order to the guard-house. Whilst this was passing I had taken notice
of an officer in the same uniform with the others, who had separated
himself from his comrades, and stood apart from the circle, not
interfering, but much interested, as it seemed, in what was going on.
When my brother had given orders for his men to take Ap Owen to the
guard-house, he called this young officer to him, and bade him take a
party with him to Mr. Devereux’s house in the square, for the purpose of
escorting us through the streets, where a crowd was now collecting. This
young gentleman is now on guard upon the house, waiting till my brother
shall come, and dismiss him: Mr. Devereux invited him to accept of some
refreshment; but he declined it on the plea of duty to the special
orders of his commanding officer.

Here Edward Wilson concluded his narrative, and John De Lancaster, who
had heard him with the most profound attention, now took his hand, and
pressing it to his bosom--Worthiest and best of men, he said, I see with
humblest thankfulness the hand of Heaven in these events, which you
have faithfully related to me; for, wonderful although they are, yet I
am sure nothing but truth can issue from your lips. The cause no longer
is with me; nor ought I to indulge a fruitless grief, much less an angry
and revengeful spirit. ’Tis henceforth only these unburied reliques,
this breathless piece of clay that I must guard. But in that duty I must
be alert, for decency requires, that with our quickest forecast and
dispatch we must provide for this corruptible, and take such instant
means, as may secure it from these melting heats till our departure: In
the mean time we must look out to find a proper house, respectably
appointed for the purpose of paying all those honours to the dead, which
must not be omitted on my part.

Having said this, he declared himself ready and sufficiently composed
to pay his respects to the family, which had so hospitably received him
and so highly merited his thanks for their benevolent attentions to the
unfortunate deceased.

At the foot of the great stair-case, which landed in the hall, he was
met by Mr. Devereux and his son, who ushered him into an elegant and
spacious room: Here he had an opportunity of returning his
acknowledgements to the amiable and compassionate Maria in a better
manner, than he was in a capacity for doing, when she was present with
them, whilst his father expired.

At her solicitation he drank some wine and partook of some refreshments;
and as the delicate consideration of his worthy host had allowed no
stranger to intrude unseasonably upon him, he found no other calls to
satisfy but those of gratitude, and whilst he saw a tender sympathy and
sweet benevolence in all around him, his spirits brightened, and his
youthful heart glowed with devotion, thankfulness and love of that pure
quality, that sacred character, which, springing up from earth, reaches
to heaven, and man partakes of in its way to God.




CHAPTER VI.

_There are Secrets in all Families._


After an hour thus passed had calmed our orphan hero’s agitated mind, a
word was given out at the hall door, and the centinels were heard to
salute, when immediately Major Wilson was announced, and young Devereux
hastened to give him welcome, and usher him into the room, where the
family were assembled. The gallant soldier entered, and was followed by
the officer who had received him at the door. In the act of paying his
devoirs to Maria Devereux, and in the manner of her receiving him, there
was an expression of surprise; and a certain instant change of
countenance on both sides, which probably did not escape the notice of
any one there present. It struck her father in particular so strongly,
that when the blood, that had rushed into, and overspread her
countenance, had now given place to an alarming paleness, he anxiously
enquired if she was not suddenly taken ill. She confessed being a little
sensible just then of the extraordinary heat upon letting in the
outward air from the door, but that she was quite as suddenly relieved,
and her looks soon testified to the truth, or, more properly speaking,
the plausibility of her excuse.

The Major in the mean time was not wholly unembarrassed, neither did he
give the directest answers to the many speeches, compliments and
enquiries, that were successively addressed to him. As soon however as
he obtained a respite, anxious to turn the general attention to some
other object, than the lady, who had so lately engrossed it, he
addressed himself to the young officer, whom he had introduced, and in
an under-tone, that was not quite a whisper, said in his ear, familiarly
laying his hand upon his shoulders--Roberts, my dear boy, I would wish
you to step to the guard-house--The obedient subaltern was instantly on
his legs--Nay, said the Major, I don’t want to hurry you out of this
company, to which, above all others, I should be most happy and most
proud to have you known, but I sincerely think it would be right for you
to visit a certain person there, who earnestly solicited to see you; and
being sure that what you ought to do you ever will do, I promised in
your name, that you should come. Go then, and tell the officer on duty,
you have my leave to be admitted to the prisoner under his charge--The
young man bowed respectfully, and asked if he had any further orders.
The Major upon referring to Mr. Devereux if he had any commands for the
party, having received for answer that he had none, said--Take off your
centinels; march them with your party to the barracks, and there
dismiss them--This was answered by a second military obeisance to his
commanding officer, and whilst Mr. Devereux was politely saying, that he
hoped to have a better opportunity of being known to him, he made his
acknowledgements with great respect, and departed.

I should guess, said Edward Wilson, from what I observed of that very
interesting youth, that there is something in his mind of a melancholy
nature, that oppresses him.

There is every thing in his mind, the Major replied, that does honour to
his feelings. You perhaps observed him stand aloof whilst we were busy
with the prisoner. That young man, by the death of his father Colonel
Roberts, is at this very time next heir to the entire estate of the
Ap-Owens under strict entail. Knowing this to be his situation, I
remarked the delicacy of his conduct with peculiar satisfaction, and I
also happen to know that he purchased into the regiment with money
supplied for that purpose by the unhappy man, whom he is gone to visit.
There was a trace of human kindness in that act, and therefore I record
it. There are packages and trunks belonging to the criminal, which we
brought ashore and have in safe keeping; these are most likely of
considerable value, and in the situation which this young man stands
towards the present owner of those effects, I think it right for his
sake that I should be present at the opening of them.

With these words he rose to take his leave; Maria’s eyes followed him to
the door; the glance was not unobserved by him; he bowed to her, and
having beckoned to his brother, Edward instantly obeyed the signal, and
they passed the windows arm in arm hastening to overtake young Roberts
and his party.

Well! cried the elder Devereux, that is indeed a soldier and a
gentleman. Never did I contemplate courage, honour and benevolence more
strongly charactered in the human form and countenance. I am enchanted
with Major Wilson, and I hope he will allow me to cultivate his
friendship.

A nobler being does not breathe the air, De Lancaster exclaimed. He is
the true son of the best of fathers, and full brother to my best of
friends.

He is the preserver of my life, Maria said, and the tears glistened in
her eyes, as she uttered it.

Astonishment seized the father and the brother upon this sudden and
extraordinary declaration. De Lancaster started from his seat, and
offered to withdraw. The generous Maria immediately interposed to
prevent him--Stay, sir, I conjure you, she exclaimed, and as you must
have noticed my agitation upon seeing Major Wilson, I beg you will be
pleased to hear me state the circumstance that caused it.

Right! cried the father, ’tis expected of you. Every thing that is
honourable, said the brother, may be expected from a character like
Major Wilson’s. I’ll pledge myself that nothing can be told of him,
which my sister may not repeat without a blush.

I thank you for that handsome testimony, rejoined De Lancaster. Miss
Devereux has said, that my friend Wilson is the preserver of her life;
every body of course, that has the honour to know her, must feel an
obligation to respect and honour him.

You may recollect, said Maria, addressing herself to her father, when
Count La Lippe had his grand review at Cintra about this time last year,
you permitted me to be present at that brilliant spectacle: upon a
charge made by the cavalry my horse became unquiet, and, rearing,
dislodged me from my saddle, whilst, my foot being entangled in the
stirrup, rendered my situation that of the most imminent danger: in this
perilous moment, as I was in the very act of falling, I found myself in
the arms of an officer, who at the same time that he was supporting me,
found means by an extraordinary exertion to stop my horse, and rescue me
in the very instant, when my life would have been at the mercy of the
terrified animal. When my alarm and agitation had so far subsided as to
enable me to speak, I did not fail, as you may well believe, to render
those acknowledgements and thanks, that were so justly due: I told the
stranger who I was, and that I had a father, who would be most anxious
to express to him his grateful sense of the service he had rendered to
me: perceiving him to be a British officer, I also besought him to
inform me by what name you, sir, were to discover and address the
preserver of my life. When I looked to him for his answer, he seemed to
be at that moment in even greater agitation than I was myself, and I had
reason to apprehend he had received some hurt by the violence of my
horse: he hastily replied, that he was to leave Lisbon the next morning,
and probably might not return to it again: after a short pause,
seemingly to recover breath, or perhaps from the effect of pain, he
added (and I well remember the very words he used, and the expressive
manner of his uttering them)--Alas, madam, I am a mere soldier of
fortune, and the only happy fortune, that has hitherto befallen me, is
this, which I now enjoy, of having rendered you some little service:
With the joy this gives me I am so abundantly rewarded, that I cannot
think of receiving any other acknowledgements, than those, which you
have honoured me with already--Whereupon, seeing my party come to me,
and that I was safe and unhurt, he apologized for the necessity of his
abrupt departure, and hastened to recover his charger and rejoin his
regiment. Judge now, my dear father, when I recognized my preserver in
the person of Major Wilson, whether I had not cause to be affected by
the conscious grateful sense of my unspeakable obligations to him.

Surely, my beloved child, replied the father of the beautiful and
ingenuous Maria, you had just and ample cause for the sensibility of
your feelings on the sight of Major Wilson; and I and your brother, and
every one, that values and esteems you, are bound for ever to esteem and
value him. Had he been the poorest private in the army, I would have
made him affluent for life: it would have been my duty: But when I find
myself indebted for every thing that is dear and precious, to a man of
Major Wilson’s amiable and engaging character, what can I say less, in
the warmth of my paternal feelings, than that if he were to claim my
daughter herself as a recompence for my daughter’s life, I, as far as
my authority extends, should have no scruple to confirm his title?

Upon hearing these words, young Devereux eagerly started from his seat,
and in the enthusiasm of his friendship for Wilson, exclaimed--That is
nobly said! that, my dear father, that is like yourself: I second it
with my whole heart.

What our delighted and approving hero felt, he properly and
considerately kept to himself, as far as his expressive countenance
would suffer him to conceal it; in the mean time, Maria (the sensitive
and interesting Maria) covered with blushes, and dissolving into tears
which had every grateful, every virtuous affection for their source,
took her father’s hand, tenderly pressed it to her lips, and hastened
out of the room.

You have allowed me, Mr. Devereux, said our hero, to witness a domestic
scene, revealing secrets, which my honour never will permit me to
violate, and inspiring me with an admiration of your lovely daughter,
and a respect for you and my friend your son, which nothing can exceed.




CHAPTER VII.

_A Chapter, which disposes of one of the principal Characters in the
History, and concludes the second Book of the third and last Volume._


The next morning early, as soon as John De Lancaster had risen and was
dressed, a note from Cornet Roberts signified, that he was waiting, and
requested leave to be admitted to him in private for a very few minutes.
This was instantly granted, and his visitor introduced the business he
was upon by premising, that it concerned a guilty but repentant object,
whom he was sensible it did not become him even to name in Mr. De
Lancaster’s hearing, unless he had his free permission so to do.

Assure me only, said De Lancaster, that the person you allude to is
really penitent, and I shall then think it my duty to hear and attend to
any thing, you have to tell me of Sir David Ap Owen, or from Sir David.

That he is truly penitent, replied Roberts, I most seriously believe,
and, as one proof of it, I have received from his hands this bond, which
with contrition he returns to you by mine.

He considers himself as a dying man, and from what he hinted at
respecting his avoidance of a public execution, I cannot but suspect
that he has taken means to intercept that punishment. I understand from
my kind friend Major Wilson, that you are apprised of my connection and
peculiar situation with respect to this unhappy man. I therefore flatter
myself you will not be displeased when I inform you, that I have here in
my hand a full confession, every word of which was dictated by him, and
signed in his own hand-writing with his name, of the dreadful crime,
which has made you fatherless, and also of another infamous proceeding
of a complicated nature, respecting a much-injured young woman, daughter
of his uncle’s bard Ap Rees, and now deceased. Under the dreadful
consciousness of these atrocious deeds he is now approaching to his last
hour. Condition more calamitous than this, is not in mortal man to
suffer or conceive.--In a trunk, of which I have the key, there is a
considerable sum of money, raised and amassed by him before and since
his leaving England, as a resource I should suppose against events,
which he had reason to foresee and dread. Out of this money he has
directed me to purchase an annuity for the joint lives of the father and
brother of the poor girl, who was the victim of his cruel and flagitious
passions. Of his mother he speaks with bitterest abhorrence, accusing
her as the incendiary, who inflamed his animosity against you, and
spurred him on to the late horrid act to satisfy her malice and revenge.
She has thrown herself into the convent of Saint Barbara, and by a
letter I am charged with he solemnly adjures her to devote the remnant
of her days to repentance and atonement. This sir, is the sum of what I
am commissioned to report to you, except the last most anxious wish of
his heart, a wish however, which he justly fears you cannot be induced
to grant, though he credits you for charity of the sublimest sort;
namely, that you would condescend to look upon him in his extreme
distress, and suffer him to humble himself before you, though despairing
of forgiveness.

Sir, replied De Lancaster, with the lessons and example of our Heavenly
Master ever before me, it is not in my heart, wounded although it be, to
turn away from this repentant criminal, and not comply with his request,
however painful it must be to grant it. Tell him I’ll come to him within
this hour; nay, if you rather wish it, I am ready at this very minute to
go with you. Perhaps what you conjecture may be true; and, if it be, no
time is to be lost.

This said, the generous youth, without a moment’s loss, took his visitor
by the arm, and with a ready mind, prepared for every trial, hastened to
the melancholy abode, where, upon giving in his name to the officer upon
guard, he was admitted to the wretch, who had been his unrelenting enemy
through life, and had at length completed the full measure of his malice
and atrocity by the murder of his father.

Upon entering the room, John De Lancaster had no sooner come within the
centinels, than he stopped, and, addressing himself to the prisoner,
said--Sir David Ap Owen, I am come at your desire to convince you that I
am incapable of withholding from you any thing on my part, that can
facilitate and further your repentance, which I truly hope may be so
perfect and sincere, as to atone for your offences, grievous as they
have been, and, through the intercession of your Redeemer, recommend you
to the mercy and forgiveness of your God.

The prisoner had been reading; he raised his eyes from the book, and
fixing them with wild amazement upon the person of the man he had so
deeply injured, now beyond all his hopes presenting himself at his call,
and addressing him with these solemn and impressive words, when struck
on a sudden to the heart (the mortal dose conspiring with his conscience
to arrest and stop its pulses) he gave a hideous shriek and fell into a
swoon.

There were two centinels within the room; the officer upon guard had
entered with De Lancaster, and his relation Mr. Roberts was also
present to assist him. By their efforts, and the medical assistance
within their call, the prisoner after a time was brought out of his fit;
De Lancaster in the mean while never stirring from the spot where he
stood.

There was evidently a change and some derangement of features observable
in the prisoner after this attack: his mouth was in a degree drawn
aside, and he seemed to speak with difficulty: he made himself however
understood, and asked if he might be permitted to be in private with the
gentleman, who had condescended to visit him--I am struck with death, he
said, and if the door was opened to me, I could not walk out of it.--To
this the officer made answer, that his orders did not allow him in any
case to take off the centinels, and of course his suit could not be
granted.--I submit, replied the dying suicide, and now when I am
hastening to the presence of that awful Judge, from whom nothing that I
have done, nothing that I have meditated, can be hidden or concealed,
what avails it who is present to hear and to attest my full and free
confession that I am guilty of the heinous crime, for which I justly
suffer this imprisonment, so rigidly, but so deservedly, enforced? It
was because the early virtue of that excellent youth, whom I have now
made fatherless, overshadowed my unworthiness, that my envious spirit
rose against him; it was the praise, which he obtained and merited from
all who spoke of him, that galled my pride, and fostered that malignity
of mind, which hurried me along from step to step to the commission of
the direst acts that ever weighed on a departing soul. To all my sins I
now have added suicide, and defrauded public justice of its rightful
punishment by being my own executioner. I have been long provided with a
poisonous and tasteless mixture, which, (with horror I confess it) was
destined to be made my instrument of vengeance upon the only woman, that
ever touched my savage heart--the innocent and beautiful Maria Devereux;
and what was it inspired me, monster as I am, with such a horrid
purpose? it was because she honourably withstood my splendid offers, and
candidly avowed that her affections were fixed upon an unknown gallant
officer, who had saved her life, and by that action won her grateful
heart.--Blessed be Heaven, that hath prevented this!--I had more to say,
much more, but it is lost; my memory wanders, and I feel the deadly
drug within me now in operation--I know, I know that there is joy
reserved for that benevolent, that blessed youth, who even now with
eyes, that beam divinity, looks on me whilst imploring pardon with my
dying breath, and pities even the murderer of his father.

Here his voice failed; the deleterious dose rushed to the seat of life;
another spasm seized him; his senses vanished; death was in his visage,
horrible to behold; the medical assistants came about him, pronounced
him gone; the poison had prevailed. The awful consummation was complete.


                        END OF BOOK THE SECOND.




                            BOOK THE THIRD.




CHAPTER I.

_Our Hero meets Major Wilson, and a Conference takes place, which to
some of my Readers may perhaps be interesting._


As John De Lancaster was crossing the barrack-yard on his return from
the guard-house, he was met by Major Wilson, to whom he imparted the
tragical event, which he had so lately witnessed. When the Major had
given directions for the measures necessary to be taken in consequence
of the prisoner’s death by suicide upon his own confession, he expressed
his wish to De Lancaster, that he would step aside with him into his
private room, having something on his mind, that he was anxious to
communicate to him.

As soon as they had seated themselves the Major said--Though the sudden
exit of this wretched man naturally takes up your thoughts, and must
also occupy my attention, yet I seize a few minutes, my dear John, to
inform you of something that has passed between Mr. Devereux and me this
morning; and I am persuaded you will pardon the intrusion, though it is
a matter, that relates entirely to myself. I had not long parted from
that gentleman, when I met you, and his business with me was to request,
that I would change my quarters, and accept of the accommodation of his
house, whilst you and Edward took up your abode with him. When I
declined this polite invitation on the plea of regimental duties, his
kindness led him to urge it upon me with a degree of earnestness, that
seemed very particular, and embarrassed me not a little; for in fact I
had more reasons for withstanding his importunity than were convenient
for me to disclose to him. To you, my dear John, I can tell all the
truth, and the truth is, that like a silly puppy as I am, I have
something more than a weak side towards his fair daughter, and don’t
choose to expose my folly in either his or her company. You must know,
my friend, that yesterday was not the first time of my seeing her. In a
situation of some danger from an unruly horse at a review, it was my
fortune to be of service to her; by which adventure I dislocated my
wrist, and have felt a pain in a certain part under my left ribs ever
since: It occurred to me that her father had been let into the secret of
this piece of service, on my part, and was seeking an opportunity for
making me some sort of return, which you can well believe I am too proud
to allow of; besides which--

Besides what? said John (availing himself of a pause in the Major’s
narrative) can’t you go on with your story, and fairly own that you are
not one whit more in love with Maria Devereux than Maria Devereux is
with you? do you suppose that I have no eyes, no observation to discover
that?

Nonsense! rejoined the Major, you allude to what occurred upon our
meeting yesterday, and mistake gratitude for liking. Now gratitude, you
know, won’t serve her purpose, for I want no return; and love would make
an ass and a fool of me, were I to let it get the mastery of me; for
what am I? ’Twould be just as possible to persuade his faithful majesty
to give me the princess of Portugal to wife, as to propose my ridiculous
self, (Major Wilson forsooth, with a sword by his side and a bit of
ribband in his hat) to a man of Devereux’s sort, whose coffers overflow
with the gold of Brazil, and whose daughter is a rock of diamonds,
eclipsed indeed by the lustre of her eyes, and the bright display of ten
thousand thousand charms, which I am not quite philosopher enough to
withstand, nor fool enough to encounter? Why, John, if I could suppose
for a moment that she had any liking for me, s’death! I should run
crazy, nay, I know not where I should run.--

Into her arms to be sure, John replied; I don’t fancy you need run any
where else, if you knew half as much of your own case as I do. But tell
me first how you brought yourself off with Mr. Devereux. Didn’t you
accept of his invitation, and won’t you post yourself in the citadel,
when the gates are opened to you?

Not for the world, said Wilson: ’Tis not in my nature to be so
presumptuous. In short I managed my affairs most wretchedly; honesty got
the better of me, and after blundering out several false excuses, I at
last let out the true one, and, like a downright John-Bull blockhead
fairly told him, that his daughter was too captivating, and I too much
captivated, to venture any nearer to a lovely and enchanting object,
whom, if I were rash enough to approach, it would be only to expose my
folly, and destroy my peace. I believe I said something too vauntingly
about honour and attachment to my profession, which I considered as a
patrimony I never could be brought to alienate: in fine however I
became more humble, and earnestly besought him to allow of my declining
his favours altogether, whilst I had recollection enough left to find my
way to the army I belonged to, and shew myself not totally unworthy of
his good opinion by the force I put upon myself to preserve it. And now,
friend John, what say you to all this, that I have been telling you?
you, that have all the wisdom in a green head, that others have in their
grey ones, answer me, and say--did I, or did I not, do right?

In point of honour, Major, you did right; you were a little romantic
perhaps, but, honourably speaking, you did strictly right. But you have
not told me how your conference ended.

At this moment an orderly man put a letter into his hands, which having
hastily perused, he said--I am not sure that our conference is ended, my
dear fellow; for it should seem as if the gentleman only quitted me to
collect materials for continuing it. I will read you Mr. Devereux’s note
just now received, and you will judge.

     “At the express desire of Maria Devereux I am to signify to the
     gallant officer, whom she holds herself indebted to for life, that
     she cannot admit the plausibility of his scruples, and will
     guarantee his honour, if he will be pleased to wave them, and make
     her and his friends happy by being of the family party this day at
     dinner. The undersigned, who writes what she has dictated, begs
     leave to add that he is ready to second these her absolute
     commands, or any other to the like effect, that she may lay upon
     him in the case aforesaid, and thereunto, for the fuller
     satisfaction of the parties concerned, he pledges his name,

                                      GEORGE DEVEREUX, SENIOR.”

No sooner had our friendly hero heard him to the end, than impatient to
congratulate him, he exclaimed--And what would you have more to assure
you, that you have gained the prize, and all your wishes, all your hopes
are crowned? Now all this I could have told you, had I not been a little
too much of a man of honour to betray family secrets, but the wretched
suicide, who lies in yonder guard-house, made no secret of declaring
before he died, that Maria Devereux scrupled not to avow her fixed
attachment to the unknown officer, who had saved her life. Can you want
any further evidence, or would you have her to proclaim her passion for
you in the public square by sound of bell? Do you require the father to
fall upon his knees to you, and petition you to save his daughter’s
life? Something a little short of this, methinks, if I can comprehend
that note, he has already done. Now then, puissant conqueror, sally
forth in all your pomp of triumph, and receive into your arms the
loveliest girl (excepting always her whom I should still except, was the
whole world of beauty ranged before me) that ever I beheld. I did not
think I could have felt such joy on this side those old towers, in which
my heart is lodged. Oh my dear Wilson, let me be the bearer of these
joyous tidings to your beloved, your delighted father, to my old darling
grandsires, to my sainted aunt and to my lovely my betrothed Amelia. My
work is done. I’ll quicken my departure.

The name of the sub-minister was now announced to Major Wilson, and De
Lancaster took his leave.




CHAPTER II.

_Major Wilson visits Mr. Devereux. John De Lancaster briefly recites the
History of Amelia Jones._


A grave and courtier-like gentleman presented himself to Major Wilson,
and with much deliberation informed him, that his most faithful majesty,
having resolved to repair to Elvas for the purpose of reviewing the
combined forces there assembled, had signified his royal pleasure, that
a British officer, not below the rank of major of cavalry, should be
sought out to attend upon him as one of his aid-de-camps on that
occasion; and that he, Major Wilson, having been recommended as an
officer in all respects qualified for that distinguished situation, he
had now the honour to inform Major Wilson, that the king had been
graciously pleased to accept his services, if it suited him to undertake
the duty.

Sir, replied Major Wilson, I understand it to be so much my duty to lay
my poor services, at the feet of his most faithful majesty, that I
cannot for a moment hesitate to profess myself ready to obey his
majesty’s commands, which I beg you will be pleased to report to the
minister in such terms as may best express the respectful sense, which I
entertain of his excellency’s kindness and condescension.

I shall report to his excellency, the sub-minister made answer, exactly
as you instruct me, and as I know your friend Mr. Devereux to be warmly
interested in your behalf, I shall call upon that gentleman in my way,
and inform him that his wishes are now happily accomplished: I have also
a particular message to Mr. Devereux in command from his majesty, in
whose grace and favour that very worthy gentleman stands extremely high.

The man in office bowed himself out of the room, and Wilson sate down
and wrote as follows to Mr. Devereux, in answer to his note.

             “Sir,

     “If my diffidence caused me to decline your most obliging
     invitation, I am sensible no plea will excuse me, when you join
     authority so irresistible with your own: You will nevertheless be
     pleased to bear in mind, that I have confided to you my terrors,
     and acknowledged my unworthiness. I have just now had a visit from
     a gentleman in office, which convinces me that you are resolved I
     shall be indebted to you for favours, which I have no right to
     expect, but which it would have been an unpardonable presumption on
     my part to have withstood. I am much afraid you have recommended a
     very unfit person for courtly services, when I cannot find words to
     express to you how much I am,

                      Sir,
                                       Your ever obliged and
                                           devoted servant
                                                    HENRY WILSON.”

When it was time for the Major to fulfil his engagement, and wait upon
Mr. Devereux, he found the gentlemen assembled in the receiving-room,
but no Maria. It is probable she had passed a little more time than was
usual with her at her toilet; but her occupation there was not to find
ornaments for her person, but rather to recommend herself to her
expected visitor by the simplicity and modest elegance of her dress.
When dinner was announced she contrived to meet the company as they
passed the hall, and avoided the embarrassment of a formal entrance.

As the events, which had so lately occurred, kept the house under
exclusion as to visitors, their party still continued to consist of
their family circle only. The conversation after dinner took that turn,
which naturally tends to put the parties at their ease, and as the
gaiety of the Major’s disposition began to show itself, Maria’s spirits
rose, and reserve was banished. Addressing herself to him, she said--I
understand you are to be at court to-morrow, and my father is to have
the honour of presenting you to his majesty. I don’t conceive you will
like it; ’tis a formal piece of business. You will be more at home in
the field at Elvas, when your favourite regiment passes in review.

In the meantime, said John De Lancaster, Edward and I must be measuring
back our solitary way by sea and land, deprived of that agreeable
society, which we enjoyed on our passage hither. Events, which we could
not foresee, and which produce sensations and reflections of a very
opposite nature, have contributed to dismiss me from the duty of a
longer stay, and a very little time will now release from any further
trouble these generous friends, whose benevolence has given us shelter;
and as I despair of ever expressing to Mr. Devereux the full sense I
entertain of the kindness and consolation I have received under the
protection of this charitable roof, I must rely upon the friend I leave
behind me to take every occasion for bearing witness to my gratitude,
till we may all have the happiness of meeting once more in our native
land; a happiness, which I hope is in reserve for every one of us. I
have secured my passage in the pacquet, now on her return to England. My
first duty will be to deposit the mournful charge, that providence has
been pleased to lay upon me, in the burial-place of my family. There are
two benevolent old men, anxiously expecting me, both far advanced in
years, between whom and me there is now a broken link in the chain,
that leaves, alas! to them but a precarious and short hold on life. Your
gallant father, my dear Henry, is, you know, and ever has been, as my
father also; and for my aunt Cecilia, what I feel towards her, is only
short of absolute idolatry.

Here as our hero seemed about to pause, Edward, who had watched him with
a pleased attention, said--John, you have gratified us much with this
account of your own feelings for a family of love, whom when you speak
of thus, by honouring them, you at the same time reflect most honour on
yourself. But is there not another in your thoughts--aye, in your heart,
my friend, of whom you have not spoken? Come, let us--let me at
least--hear me of the lovely, the beloved Amelia.

Ah, why name her? De Lancaster replied. Why tell the Major soldiers are
courageous? What news to him? He knows it, and he feels it? Why tell
Miss Devereux, women may be charming, and men be charmed? She knows it,
and we feel it. If love be named in any lady’s hearing, it should be
love particular, not general--How am I sure, if I should speak of love
in any way that I can speak, the topick would be pleasing to Miss
Devereux, who has such powers to inspire it, but may not want to be told
any thing of those, who feel it?

I understand you, sir, Maria replied: You are very civil, and a little
sly: But be assured, of all the topicks you could single out most
grateful to my ears, and perhaps most correspondent with my feelings,
would be a fair account without reserve of your love (which I am sure
is honourable love) for the lady of your choice, of whose perfections I
can’t doubt; and as for beauty I’ll take George’s word for that; he
speaks in rapture of the fair Amelia.

You must not quite believe him, said our hero: At least it is not for
her beauty I should be inclined to speak in raptures of Amelia. Her form
and face are pleasing I presume; to me at least they are: but there is
something spiritual about her; something I can’t define; an emanation
from the mind within, that takes and keeps possession of my heart. I
seriously declare I never yet was in her company, when I had leisure to
bestow my attention upon her beauty, simply so considered. She was but
as a child when I first saw her; Nature had not supplied her with
attractions, that could induce me to mistake the impression, I then
received, for any other than a love as pure as her own thoughts, a zeal
to serve her, a wish that I might live to make her happy, and shield
her, like a blossom, from the blast. I found her in the humblest
situation, that dependance on my friends for education and support could
place her. She was an orphan without means to furnish food for another
day. There was a soft petition in her eyes for pity and protection,
which if I had not felt in every vein that visited my heart, I had been
a monster. Her father, a brave soldier, like my friend here in my eye,
whose honour and whose sword were all his portion, married the generous
girl, who risked her life to nurse and save him in a dreadful fever,
when all his fellow soldiers round were dying, and every breath of air,
that she respired, was charged and saturated with infection.

Oh what a godlike act, Maria cried! she merited his love. Could he do
less?

He could not, and he did not, John replied. She was the daughter of a
brother officer, the major of his regiment, then serving in the West
Indies. She lived to be the mother of Amelia; she was too good for this
bad world we live in, and Heaven recalled her; after she was lost, death
had but little trouble to destroy a wretched man, whom sorrow had struck
down, and both Amelia’s parents now repose in the same grave: by happy
chance she found her way to England: there, by the bounty of my
grandfather Morgan and my deceased mother she was placed under the care
of an excellent lady, who educated and brought her up. When my poor
mother died, she left her what she had in her disposal, a slender
portion, but enjoined me on her death bed to consider it as my especial
duty to protect her, and make her happiness, her honour and her
interests in all respects my own: from that moment such they have been,
and ever will be--This is the history of my Amelia. It is my happy
fortune to have gained an interest in her pure and virtuous heart, and,
if we live to meet, let a few months pass by without fresh cause of
sorrow, she will be my wife.

Happy, happy man! exclaimed Maria, the envied privilege of whose sex it
is to put aside the mean concern of money, and say to the dear object of
your heart--I love you; share my fortune: I am your’s!

As she said this, not daring to abide the interpretation that her words
might bear, she rose and with apparent agitation left the room.




CHAPTER III.

_A definitive Explanation takes place between Maria Devereux and Major
Wilson._


When Maria had retired, the company were silent for a time. Devereux at
length addressed De Lancaster, and said--How much I hold your character
in honour for what you have related to us, I cannot tell you; but I am
convinced the proper use of the advantages, that affluence gives us (and
therein I agree with my Maria) is, to procure that lasting happiness,
which a well-chosen partnership for life is of all chances, that this
world can give us, the likeliest to ensure to us. Some aspire to raise
their families to rank and title; and it would be a laudable ambition,
if nobler principles, superior wisdom and sublimer virtues were
interwoven with our pedigrees, and descended to our posterity with the
patents of our peerages, and entail of our estates: but these are not
the expectations, neither are they the motives, that induce ambitious
parents to betray their children into those fatal and delusive
marriages, which only elevate them to become conspicuous objects of
disgrace and scorn. I have been long persuaded, that the controul of
parents over the affections and attachments of their children should, by
the laws of nature and of reason, be only exercised for the prevention
of ill-advised, unworthy, indiscreet connections, which cannot fail to
lead to ruin and repentance. A dissipated profligate, a vain fool, a
gamester, a disbeliever, libertines without principle and conceited
puppies without employ have been known to catch the eyes of an
unthinking girl, but ’tis the parent’s duty to repulse them; so is it
not his duty, but the abuse of it, when he refuses to bestow her fortune
upon the worthy man, whom she has honourably singled out, and wisely
chosen, not by the eye, but heart, to be the sharer of her happiness.
The children, Heaven hath blessed me with, are fitted by understanding,
and fully able by the ample means, which of right they possess, to carve
out for themselves their future lot in life, without regard to what the
objects of their choice may be unprovided with, and which they abound
in--worldly property. Each of them have enough, whereon to live in ease
and affluence so long as they can live in harmony and peace--And now I
have tired you with a long harangue, but I would wish to have it
understood by all here present as my rule of practice; so with your
leave, good friends, we will break up this court of conscience, and
remove our cause into another, where we can have the counsel and
assistance of the lady, who there is left in solitary expectation of our
company over her tea and coffee.

The proposal was instantly complied with, and the gentlemen adjourned to
another room, where Maria was present, and did the honours of her
tea-table. When this business was dispatched, she produced the
chess-board, and offered a challenge, which Major Wilson gallantly
accepted. Parties, that devote themselves to that dull monopolizing
game, seem for a time to be so absolutely excluded from society, and so
wedded to their own manœuvres, that it is perfectly fair and lawful to
consider them as absentees, and accordingly the gentlemen, who were at
liberty to follow their own amusements, walked out to enjoy the breeze,
that every evening visits the banks of the Tagus from the northward, and
qualifies the else insufferable heat.

It was some time before the contending parties perceived that they had
no spectators, and not even a solitary second to appeal to in a case of
controversy, if such had arisen, or should arise, in the course of their
engagement.

You are too strong for me, said Maria, and as I cannot make any
impression on your defences, I give up the contest. You are absolutely a
professor, and I am a mere novice, more fit to be your disciple than
your antagonist: besides, you mask your game, whilst I lay myself open
to you, and (which is more provoking still) when you have me in your
power, and might check-mate me by a single move, you always
mischievously contrive to leave some loop-hole for me to escape, on
purpose to postpone a victory, which you are indifferent about securing
and seem to consider as below your notice.

If I do this, he said, I’m sure you cannot seriously suppose my reasons
to be those, which you assign. Could you not find some motive for my
hesitation more natural, and less impossible, than indifference? May not
the consciousness of what I am, instruct me almost to distrust my
senses, though the divinity, whom I adore, should condescend to me her
humble worshipper with looks so gracious, kindness so alluring, as seem
to say--Approach me, and be blest?--but how to approach, when I compute
the distance, that throws me off, and awes me from the attempt, is
indeed a question, that staggers and confounds me.

At this she smiled, and with a look, that spoke encouragement, which
could not be mistaken, I suppose, she said, the scale, on which you
measure distances between us, is a certain thing called money, which
though you yourself disinterestedly hold in no respect, you think
perhaps that I have not the spirit to treat with the same contempt as
you do. Therein you do me no wrong. Were those eventual and mean
advantages, which I possess, transferred from me to you, I solemnly
declare they would not be a feather in your scale, as I should weigh it;
why then should you suffer them to give a false preponderance to mine?
When Owen laid his fortune at my feet, I had no knowledge of his
character; he had the address to keep it out of sight, his manners were
polite, his temper placid, in point of person nature had rather favoured
him than not. My father left me free to make my choice, and I had made
it; therefore I refused him. Now do you understand me, do you know me?
need I be more explicit? No; the privilege of truth can go no further;
sincerity itself must stop me here.

Now, now you throw me on my knees for ever, the enraptured lover cried:
now I look up to you as to a being, exalted above all that I conceived
of human excellence: your nobleness of soul is now a charm beyond what
nature has bestowed upon you, and my admiration of your beauty is almost
lost whilst I adore your goodness. When happy fortune threw me in the
way to save you, and receive you in my arms upon that memorable day, I
had marked you out and fixed my eyes upon you in the charge; I knew you
as the daughter of the wealthiest man in Portugal, and honour tied my
tongue, though even then I struggled with a passion which tempted me to
tell you--That your rich father amidst all his treasures had but one
recompence that I would take; which being far above what I could merit,
or dare aspire to, I was proudly silent, and studied rather to avoid
than seek your presence, conscious that every time I looked upon you I
should find fresh occasion to admire you, and, as love sunk the deeper
in my heart, the deeper I should sink into despair.

Now then, she said, I am understood at last, and it is not the first
proof I have received how slowly merit finds that secret out, which
impudence and vanity pretend at the first glance to see through, and
interpret in their own favour. You are a soldier, and modesty of mind is
ever found with manliness and valour: you must be still a soldier: I’ll
not ask you to sacrifice your honour and your occupation: ’tis for your
country’s service you were born; that is your character; in that you
shine, to that you must adhere, and never for an instant fly your post,
but when you fly to save a fellow creature, as you did me. If you
suspect me weak enough to sigh for any honours greater than to share
your fortune, any pleasures beyond those, which your approving smile
will ever give me, any self-consequence above the honest pride, that I
shall feel to hear your praises, you mistake me wholly. Don’t think that
I will borrow from my father’s stores to dazzle you with diamonds; no;
not one, had he a mine, would I consent to wear, unless by your command,
and that I think will never be your wish to lay upon me, whilst there
are nobler graces and adornments within my reach far more becoming of a
soldier’s wife.

What answer Major Wilson made to this, how the dialogue was carried on
during the time the lovers were alone, as likewise how much shorter, or
how much longer, that time seemed to them to be than it really was,
must be left as matter of conjecture, which the imagination of the
reader will readily supply without referring to the chess board to fill
it up, as there is authority to say that game was not by either party
proposed to be renewed. Happiness sanctioned by paternal authority, and
virtuous love unchecked by the demurs of honour, filled the brave heart
of Wilson with delight, and he heard an early day announced by Devereux
for the sure tying of that sacred knot, which nothing but the hand of
death should sever, though in too many cases it has proved a slip knot
in the fingers of the law.




CHAPTER IV.

_John De Lancaster embarks for England, accompanied by his Friend the
Reverend Mr. Wilson. Conversation on the Passage._


There was no longer any cause to stop De Lancaster’s return to England.
All duties were discharged; all ceremonies had been observed towards the
unburied body of his father, which man’s inventive fancy has devised to
decorate the case, that holds our clay, and make the ostentatious living
pay large contributions for those empty honours which they bestow on
human dust and ashes. Mutes, who would keep no silence, and, mourners,
who expressed no sorrow, in rooms, hung round with “customary suits of
solemn black,” had regularly sate up all night long, with their full
complement of wax-tapers, to watch a thing that could not run away, and
which no one wished to steal. All these ceremonies, which, had poor
Philip been alive, would have given him such intolerable annoyance, had
now with religious punctuality been performed, and his corpse was
committed to a ship, which, unlike to that wherein he came, was not
bound to the coast of slavery, but to the land of liberty.

All things were now on board; the morning dawned; the dog-vane witnessed
an auspicious breeze; the crew sung out at the cap-stan and the pacquet
was under weigh. Devereux’s eight-oared galley was in waiting, and
nothing now remained but to put off and part. Although the friends, who
stayed on shore, as well as those, who put to sea, took the very course,
to which their wishes pointed, and which their own immediate happiness
prescribed, yet they could not separate without sorrow, and the last
farewell drew tears from the brightest eyes in Portugal, and sighs from
some of the best hearts in nature. Philip the whilst, in his narrow
house of lead, slept undisturbed, and was as perfectly untouched by
sensibility as if he had been alive.

The gallant vessel in the mean time, as if conscious of the charge she
had on board, cut her passage through the waves, not deigning to rise to
them, but throwing them aside, and dashing them from her bows, as her
spreading canvass pressed her down in the water, and hurried her along
before the steady breeze.

Our hero and his friend, having cast a parting look upon the towers of
Lisbon, retired into the cabin, whilst the master kept the deck,
regaling himself in the prospect of so fair an outset, for the weather
was delicious, and the sky prognosticated a continuance of the breeze.

If any thing, said Wilson, could reconcile me to the imprisonment of a
ship, it would be a day like this, with a breeze impregnated with odours
of orange flowers to regale my senses, and the elements in good humour
all around me. I am happy to discover that there are some consolatory
moments in a seaman’s life. And now, my dear John, I am satisfied you
have not let these singular events pass by without reflecting, with due
gratitude to the Disposer of our fate, how graciously he has been
pleased to terminate our enterprize; which, though not absolutely
untinctured with disappointment and misfortune, might yet have led to
miseries, that would have admitted of no consolation. Don’t let me
wound your filial feelings, when I remind you, that the blow, which made
you fatherless, might have fallen where it would have extinguished more
lives than one, and blotted out the very name of De Lancaster for ever.
If I went so far as to say, that probably there are few beings in
existence, whose loss society has less cause to mourn than that of him,
whose remains we are now bearing to the grave, I should not at least
offend against truth, tho’ I might need your pardon for addressing the
remark to you. How visible is the hand of divine justice in the
apprehension of that guilty wretch, and in the prevention of those
further crimes, which he meditated to commit! What can be more
strikingly charactered, more impressively apportioned to our ideas of
retribution, than that tragical catastrophe, which passed before your
eyes, and put a period to his sinful life? How mercifully is it ordered,
that those worldly blessings, which he so grossly abused, will now
devolve upon one, who seems able and disposed to estimate them rightly,
and employ them worthily! when we turn our thoughts to what has come to
pass respecting my most fortunate and happy brother, what a dispensation
do we contemplate! How unexpected, how beyond all hope! If in one
respect we bring home with us fresh cause for mourning, do we not also
bring full matter for rejoicing, if happily we return to our dear
friends in safety, and find them, as Heaven grant we may! in prosperous
health and undisturbed tranquillity of mind?

That, my dear Edward, that indeed, replied De Lancaster, will be a
happiness never to be exceeded, a vouchsafement never to be forgotten.
As from these windows I look out and see the foaming track, which our
swift-sailing vessel leaves behind her, my heart exults to think, that
we have cut off so much from the space of sea, that we must traverse
before we reach the shores of that asylum, where I left all that my soul
has treasured up to bless and crown with happiness my days to come. Ah,
my best friend, if Heaven shall so vouchsafe that I may live to call
Amelia mine, and, when possest of all my heart holds dear, if those
principles, which you have taught me, shall be found still operative,
still inviolate and pure, how vast will be my obligations to you, who
took me when I was in a state of dereliction, taught me to perceive that
I was endowed with reason, and enabled me to discern how to apply it to
its proper uses. If I could have suffered the events, which you have
instanced, to have passed by me without reflections, of which you remind
me, I must have been insensible indeed: On the contrary, be assured they
struck me with the double force of opposite examples, shewing me both
the evil and the good; the punishment of villainy in the instance of Ap
Owen, and the reward of virtue in the person of your brother.

The master of the pacquet now came into the cabin, and introduced a
gentleman by the name of Anderton, in whose frame and complexion the
effects of tropical disease were strongly marked. He might be somewhat
past the middle stage of life, and there were traces in his sickly
countenance of that mild character, that to hearts like those of our
hero and his friend made an interesting appeal; and he soon perceived
that his good fortune had thrown him into the company of fellow
passengers, who felt for his situation, and were naturally disposed to
shew him all attentions in their power, and tender him a share in all
those comforts, which Devereux’s care had amply stored them with, and
which his condition seemed so much to need.

The wind was fair, the sea was easy, and the motion of the vessel being
regularly and rapidly progressive, was not of that sort, which produces
sickness and disquietude. Anderton by their invitation reposed himself
on the couch, where they took their seats on each side of him. His eyes
now brightened as he turned them on his beneficent companions, the
blood flushed faintly in his cheeks, and addressing them, he said--

Knowing in whose company I have the happiness to be, and highly grateful
as I am for the kind reception you have given me, though as yet a
perfect stranger, it is fit that I should briefly tell you who and what
I am; briefly it needs must be, for one dull scene of industry, one
uniform pursuit, comprize the whole history of my unimportant solitary
life. If it were the sole purpose of man in this world to make his
fortune, I have accomplished that purpose; for in colonial property I am
superfluously rich. I was an orphan in my infancy, and have no
recollection of my parents; after a scanty education upon charity, I was
taken into a merchant’s service, where I performed the menial offices
of his counting-house; there however I gained a knowledge of accounts
and forms of business. I devoted myself, as I have told you, without
avocation of any kind, to the task before me, and was consigned over to
the manager of a considerable estate in Jamaica as an under agent, who
was not likely to decline any labour, or betray any trust. I did neither
one nor the other; they did not spare me, and I did not spare myself.
Incessant industry, no taste for pleasure, no incitements to excess, an
absolute sequestration from all society, and no diversion of ideas from
those, which I employed upon the cane, the mill and the negro, raised me
by degrees hardly gained to a capacity of adventuring for myself, and my
laborious efforts have succeeded, as I told you, to the fullest extent;
I am the sole fabricator of an ample property, for the attainment of
which I have, as you see, sacrificed my health, and deprived myself of
the ability to enjoy my earnings. One consolation however supports me on
reflection, which is that of being conscious, that I am chiefly indebted
for my prosperity to the humanity, with which I ever treated those, who
were my slaves: I have been the founder of their happiness, and they the
instruments, that have raised my fortune. I made their cabins
comfortable, their wives and children happy; I contemplated their
increase with satisfaction, and can boast of having never purchased or
imported a single African, since I have been owner of a single acre.
They grew up with me as their common father, they lived and worked for
me, I lived to think and act for them. To the whole world of white men I
am a stranger; except with one alone I never formed acquaintance: he,
and he only, was my friend; from him I learnt the precepts and the
policy of humanity to my enslaved fellow creatures: I loved him as my
own life; he married and became a widower; I received him in his sorrow,
and lodged him in my house; he was a soldier, and a gentleman; my purse
would have been his for every use he could have put it to, but his
high-born spirit would not stoop to obligations of that sort; he
sickened, languished a few days, and expired in my arms. My spirit died
with him; every comfort, every joy my nature was capable of feeling,
were buried with him in the grave. He left a little orphan girl, in whom
the remnant of my heart was wrapped; her grandfather took her from me;
she was sent to England, and, if she yet survives, and is in the
virtues of her mind, what she promised to be in the beauties of her
person, she is an angel. Would I might see her once before I die!

Tell me her name, said De Lancaster, and instantly, as Anderton
pronounced Amelia Jones, our astonished hero threw himself back on the
couch, smote his hands together and with uplifted eyes exclaimed--Just
Heaven, how wonderful are thy decrees!

The explanation, that ensued, would be superfluous to relate; it filled
up the time till the hour of dinner put an end to it. Devereux’s
provisions furnished out an excellent repast, and the sea-air supplied
an appetite. Anderton fed heartily, and the languor of his countenance
yielded to the joint effects of cordial diet, and that elevation of
spirits, which the conversation of De Lancaster and Wilson had inspired
him with. After a glass or two of delicious wine had gone temperately
round, the cabin was cleared; all, who had charge of the ship, repaired
to their duty on the deck, and the three passengers were left at liberty
to resume their conversation.




CHAPTER V.

_John De Lancaster and Wilson arrive at Kray Castle._


From the preceding Chapter it appears that John De Lancaster had made
known to Anderton the situation of Amelia Jones, and that gentleman no
sooner found himself in private with his new friends, than, turning to
our hero, he said--The hopes, you have held out to me of beholding the
relick of my dear-loved friend, inspire me with new life, and I will not
despair but that the clear air of Wales may keep my waining lamp alive a
little longer.

At least I’ll give the experiment a chance, for though I don’t fear
death, simply considered as a dismission from this world, yet I would
most devoutly wish to fit myself for it as my passport to the world to
come. For that, alas! I have made no preparation. Of my religion I am
supremely ignorant; I have had no church, no pastor to instruct me. I
scarce know why and by what right I call myself a Christian: I must
believe I ought to understand the book of duties, that is open to me;
but where is the instructor? Nothing can be too much for me to give,
could I but find that charitable man, who patiently and piously would
teach me rightly to know and reverence my God, or ere I am summoned to
appear before him. The tomb itself can be no darker than my ignorant
mind; he whose instruction will throw light on that, will merit all the
uses of my fortune, on which there is not in this world one, who by
affinity or friendship has the slightest claim, now that Amelia Jones is
so disposed of.

Stop there, said the Reverend Mr. Wilson, if you please. Had you not
named what seems so like a lure to bribe me to your service, I had
offered my best endeavours, as in duty bound (being myself a minister of
the Gospel), to give you that assistance, which you profess yourself so
earnest to obtain.

Oh that you would! said Anderton.

Be patient, rejoined Wilson, I can make no promise till I am satisfied,
that you withdraw all thoughts of every thing, which seems allied to
worldly recompence, and credit me for pure benevolence and zeal to serve
my God by services to you. Here therefore we must conclude this
conversation for the present, and wait till further knowledge of each
other may possibly dispose us to renew it with effect.

In the further progress of their voyage Anderton’s gentle and benignant
nature so recommended him to Wilson, and he drew such comfort from the
discourses, which that excellent instructor favoured him with, that, as
his understanding opened, his spirits and his health improved, and he
became as it were a new creature.

As they neared the land, the breeze freshened, and in the first of the
morning they came to anchor in the port of Falmouth. Upon their landing,
the attendants on the corpse lost no time in providing for its
conveyance to Exeter, where fresh relays were to be had; and, when these
arrangements were made, our hero and his friend, with young Williams
only, set out for Kray Castle by the shortest road, and Anderton bent
his course to London. The journey of these gentlemen was in all respects
like the journeys, which other gentlemen take, except in novels, for the
drivers and horses, whether good or bad, performed their stages, and
their carriage was driven into the court of Kray Castle, nay, even up to
the castle-door, without accident or adventure of any kind. The surprise
of the old porter was such, that he took especial care, that every body
within hearing should partake of it, and rang out an alarm so violent,
that some cracked bells and some crazy towers would have resented it in
a manner not very convenient for the puller of the rope, which provoked
them to such clamorous exertion.

The family had not quitted the breakfast-room, for Mr. De Lancaster had
engaged their attention to a dissertation upon dreams, in consequence of
a prediction, which David Ap Rees had ventured to enounce from his
tripod, namely, that Mr. John De Lancaster was on his road, and would
speedily arrive in safety; David having gone to bed with a full dose of
soporifick metheglin, and been visited in his sleep with the vision of
young John and his father alighting at the castle-gate safe and sound
from the backs of two griffins, that had flown with them through the
air. This he had imparted to his patron after his morning serenade, and
that excellent person had entertained a very good opinion of the
prophecy, though he had some hesitation to admit the vehicle of the
griffins: Upon this circumstance he commenced a learned dissertation
upon dreams, holding at nought Mr. Locke’s notion of their being made up
of the waking man’s thoughts, and substituting an opinion of his own,
which took up so much time in explanation, and grew to be so entirely
unintelligible by his mode of explaining it, that when the turret bell
sounded out that terrible alarm, old Morgan started and cried out
amain--What the devil is coming to us now? That horrid bell has waked me
out of a comfortable nap, in which I was dreaming of--

Your grandson John, said De Lancaster, and behold he is here!

It is in scenes like this, which now took place upon the sudden
entrance of our hero, that speeches cannot be found for people, who all
speak at the same time, and of course out-talk description. The tender
sex have tearful eyes and trembling nerves for these occasions; the
three seniors had their several modes of giving vent to their joy, and
each mode different from the other.--The dream is verified, cried De
Lancaster, my grandson is arrived in safety--But he did not come upon a
dragon, said the Colonel--No matter, exclaimed old Morgan; here he is,
and that’s enough.

Edward Wilson now came into the room, and the cordial congratulations of
every one present were renewed upon the sight of him. In the general
exultation it so happened that nobody had yet recollected to make one
enquiry about poor Philip. At length Cecilia said--What is become of my
brother? Have you left him still in Lisbon?

He is not in Lisbon, replied John. We should not have left you without
an account of every thing as it came to pass, if a single pacquet had
sailed from Lisbon, whilst we remained in it; we came in the only one,
that was on that side the water, and they stopped it till the dispatches
from the army were made up. Much has occurred in the short time we have
been absent from you, and we have happy news for Colonel Wilson of our
gallant Major; but as we have travelled hard and are journey-baited; if
you will let us satisfy our hunger first, we will then endeavour to
satisfy your curiosity.




CHAPTER VI.

_Familiar Anecdotes of the Family at Kray Castle: Comments on the
Events, which occurred at Lisbon._


It will be a very saving compromise for our readers to refer John De
Lancaster’s narrative to their recollection rather than to tire their
patience with a recapitulation of what they have heard before. Let it
therefore be understood that the eventful narrative has been minutely
given; that Mr. De Lancaster with philosophical resignation has
acquiesced in the dispensation of poor Philip’s death; that he has
acknowledged the hand of Providence in the seizure of his murderer, and
in the consummation of his dreadful doom; and that the happy return of
our beloved hero, now sole heir of the De Lancasters and Morgans, with
the brilliant prospect of Major Wilson’s fortunate connection, leave
impressions on the hearers only tinged, not obscured, by sorrow and
regret.

When we reflect, said Robert De Lancaster, upon occurrences in all
respects, save one, so prosperously, so providentially disposed, it
would be an unpardonable offence in us, who have been listening to the
narrative, were we to suffer one ingrateful murmur to escape us, because
the general blessing, though beyond our hopes, and far above our merits,
defeats our wishes in one single point. Cecilia will recollect how ill
we jointly augured of the idle expedition, that has now proved fatal to
the unhappy object, who obstinately would set out upon it, and returns a
corpse. Fate has now struck him down, who would not wait to witness, as
in duty bound, and to console, as by humanity it was required of him, a
wife, who languished on the bed of death. Can we complain of this? Is
there not justice in the dispensation? If then it behoves me, his
father, to submit in silence, who amongst you will give way to
lamentation? We will consign his body to the grave with suitable
respect, and his memory to oblivion with as much philosophy as we can
muster, for in the journal of his days, if every action was set down,
there will be found not one, on which we can engraft a single word of
praise to grace him with an epitaph. Therefore, my good and worthy
brother Morgan, you, who by law, and I, who by nature, fathered this
poor man, will pray for life, that we may see the hour, which but for
this event, had joined the hands of those affianced lovers, now in our
sight, destined, as I trust, to keep our names alive and lay our grey
heads in a peaceful grave.

I’ll tell you what, brother of mine, said old Morgan; if I live to see
that happy day, I don’t believe I shall be content to lay my grey head
in any grave at all, let it be as peaceful as it may. I hope those fatal
spinsters won’t cut my thread, just when I want to wind up my bottom,
and be merry: why, I’ve a cellar full of wine, that I hope will be drank
out before I die; I have a locker full of money to scatter amongst the
poor, and a subterranean of strong beer to set the antient Britons
a-dancing on their heads. I know I am an old gouty good-for-nothing
blockhead; but what then? ’Tis other people’s wit, not our own, that
makes us merry; and let death stand at the door, I’ll have my laugh
out, so long as he does not come in, and spoil the company: Here’s my
old friend Wilson, who has literally one leg in the grave, why he makes
battle still, like a stout fellow, and fights upon his stumps, as
Whittington did in Chevy Chase. Was there ever in the annals of good
fortune such a happy father as he is? ’Tis not in the order of things
probable, that a fellow, like his son Henry, with all the disadvantages
of modest merit, refined high principle and rigid unrelenting honour,
should find himself invited, nay, compelled, to be one of the happiest
and most prosperous gentlemen, that beauty, wealth and virtue ever
joined to bless. How, in the name of all that’s wonderful, did it come
to pass, that Devereux, a trader in diamonds, should have the good sense
to discover, and the good heart to reward, the merits of Major Wilson?
What shall I say of him? Why, I will say, that he is worthy to enjoy the
friendship of De Lancaster, and his daughter to share the affection and
esteem of Cecilia and Amelia; and if any body can suggest how I may do
him and her greater honours, I shall be glad to hear it. As for myself,
if some kind spirit, that is friendly to good fellowship, will
graciously keep from me pain and sickness for a while, I shall be
profoundly thankful; but I must not be importunate; if he gives me to
the full as much as I deserve, and gives no more, my allowance will be
nothing: still if I may be suffered to hang, as I do, like a ragged
remnant, on the skirts of society, I shall be well content, for I would
fain shake honest Devereux by the hand before I die; aye, and poor
Anderton before he dies, because he loved the dear white man, whom I
loved and lamented, and because he dandled on his knee my pretty Amelia,
who is sweeter than all his sugar-canes, though she does not care a rush
for such a rascally old negro as I am.

Oh sir, sir, cried Amelia, don’t say that, even in jest--And rising from
her seat, devoutly put her arms about his neck, and pressed her lips
upon his forehead.

Child, child, he cried; don’t overthrow me. I am a weak old fool with a
watery head, and you, who are the fair nymph of the fountain, can make
it stream at pleasure.

Brother Morgan, said De Lancaster, whilst you think fit to rally
yourself with pleasantry, you shall be as pleasant as you like, and we
won’t quarrel with you; but if you pique us upon the serious point of
affection and respect, we may chance to defend ourselves in the same
manner, that Amelia has done; I think therefore you will do well to be
contented with the salute you have got; for the rough beard of Menelaus
won’t do after the sweet lips of Helen.

In the mean time, said the Colonel, if it will be any gratification to
see Maria Devereux, I’ll introduce her to you. It is an elegant
compliment, that her father has made in sending me her picture; and
though Henry tells me in his letter that it is not half so handsome as
the original, that may be an opinion very natural for him to give, but
we are not absolutely bound to take the lover’s word against the
painter’s art. Saying this, he gave the picture to Morgan; the ladies
eagerly rose, and even De Lancaster was impatient to satisfy his
curiosity with a sight of it: The ladies were in raptures with the
beauty, De Lancaster with the character of the countenance; Morgan
declared at once, that he had seen enough to understand why she
preferred one of the finest fellows in the British service to all the
yellow-faced nobles in the court of Portugal--There is discernment, said
he, in those eyes, brother De Lancaster--Yes, yes; replied the other--

    “Oculi loquuntur male pertinaces.”




CHAPTER VII.

_Conversation in an Evening Walk._


The evening was delicious, there was a stillness in the air, that seemed
like the repose of nature, when our hero and his Amelia walked forth to
enjoy those happy moments, which rural scenes and rural solitude afford
to Love. They were no sooner out of ear-shot from the castle walls, when
John began--Now, my sweet girl, when no witness is about us, but the
unseen Spirit, that protects and guards you, I can open all my heart to
you without reserve, for it honours you, it loves you, it adores you. I
have been absent from you; I have visited another country, I have seen
other women, and contemplated their charms and their allurements without
emotion or the diversion of a thought from you. I am entirely and
unalterably yours. I think you love me; nay, I am sure you do; nothing
therefore but the hand of death can separate us, and when I dissuaded
Anderton from leaving you his fortune, it was because I regarded you
already as my wife. But time, my lovely girl, must pass before I can
have legal right to call you by that name. You see within how short a
period I have been deprived of both my parents, and although my
grandfather De Lancaster treats or feigns to treat the late melancholy
event as a philosopher, I cannot help feeling it as a son; for I was
present to behold my father die and witnessed his last words. If I could
charge my conscience with having hesitated or delayed to obey his
summons, and hasten to his relief, I should be wretched in the extreme:
but, thank Heaven, I had fortitude to tear myself from your arms, and
cannot reproach myself with any breach of duty. Nothing can exceed the
kindness I received from Mr. Devereux and his family: but neither his
hospitality, nor the approaching nuptials of his daughter with my
friend Major Wilson, could prevail with me to prolong my stay a single
hour beyond the very first pacquet, that afforded me an opportunity of
returning to the place where I had left my heart. You will perceive I
gave you credit for a mind superior to the vanity of show and ornament;
for I have not brought a single gem to glitter on that lovely person,
whose elegance and simplicity are its best adornments. My dear Amelia,
we must seek for other honours, than decoration can give us; we must
find out better uses for the affluence we are entrusted with, than gems
and equipage and splendid galas: If you and I decide upon a country
life, we will not let our tranquillity degenerate into indolence, nor
ever suffer these superfluities, which we have no present call for, to
accumulate for those, may chance to come after us to inherit, and
perhaps to misapply, them: No, we will consider prosperity as a loan,
and administer our abundance as the almoners of Providence, and stewards
for the uses of our fellow-creatures, whose privations and distresses
shall have claims upon that, which is not given as a monopoly to be
devoured by one, but as a resource against the wants of many. By this
conduct I may atone for not devoting my life, as well as my fortune, to
the service of my country; and you may walk forth amongst your poor
dependent pensioners, brighter and more splendid in the lustre of your
charities than if I hung you round with all the jewels of the Lady of
Loretto. Let us live hospitably, becomingly, liberally, after the
example of my grandfather; but don’t let us make an undistinguishing
waste either by our domestic style of living, or by wanton largesses to
any, who may not deserve, as well as need, relief. We will support the
industrious, who struggle against hard fortune, and the helpless, who
would else sink under it; but we will not confound the lazy drone with
the laborious bee. And now, beloved of my soul, as I have occupied you
with a long homily, and wearied you with a long walk, here is a baiting
place to repose in; sit down with me upon this shady bench, and let me
read my answer in those heavenly eyes.

Oh, my dear sir, replied the fond and happy Amelia, your just and
generous sentiments instruct and charm me. Convinced, that by the
practice of these virtues you will ensure all that my heart can wish,
all that my prayers can ask of Heaven, you give me that supreme
delight, which only can be felt, but not described. What can I say to
you? What other answer can you look for from your devoted, your
betrothed Amelia, but that I am entirely yours? Is it enough to tell
you, that I love you, that my whole happiness depends upon you? No; I am
not quite convinced, but that the impression, which at our first
interview you left so deeply fixed in this poor hopeless heart, would
have compelled me to have loved you still, though you had treated me
with marked neglect; nay, though you had neglected your own self, and
fallen off from that high character in which I now behold you and
admire. I felt as if I could have forgiven you every thing: and when you
left me for so long a time without a word to soften my despair, I feared
indeed that you was lost for ever, but I did not suspect you to be
cruel. I knew you was offended with Mrs. Jennings, but I was sorry to
find your resentment could be so lasting, and that you would take no
pains to acquit me, who was innocent, and set my mind at rest. Morning
and night I mused upon the words I heard you utter, when, looking on the
portrait of my father, you pledged protection to the orphan who then
lived, as she still does, upon the bounty of your family--Is this the
man (I said within myself) who threw his arms about me, and pressed me
with such rapture to his heart? Was there no meaning in that fond
embrace? Did it sink only into my sad heart? Alas, I hoped that his had
felt it too!--Thus I tormented my poor wretched self, till now, behold!
I am sitting by your side--Nay; hear me out!--I have not told one
half--

The expostulation was not out of place, for by some means or other,
(what I know not) our heroine was defrauded of her right to tell the
other half; and whether it was ever told, or not, I hope is no great
object to the reader; for, upon the word and honour of a novelist, I
have no authority, that can decide the question.

In due time the corpse of Philip De Lancaster arrived and was interred
in the vault with his ancestors. Every member of that antient house
attended the funeral, and several of the intimates and friends of the
family shewed their respect by being present at the solemnity.

As the parishioners and labouring poor had no particular reason for
tears and lamentations, they reasonably enough forbore to interrupt the
ceremony, and only gratified their curiosity by gazing on the plumes and
scutcheons and the costly pall and coffin: this did extremely well, and
the cheering horn of fat Welch ale, that was dealt out to quench a
thirst, that was natural to them at all times, and did not spring upon
this occasion from sorrow, did still better. A great company were
regaled in the state apartment’s of the castle, and a mighty mob in the
lower regions.

Whilst these things were going on, Lawyer Davis, Doctor Llewellyn and
the family-bard old Williams held a special consistory in a private
cell, for the purpose of minuting down the _memoranda_, proper to be
inserted in the family archives under the article of “Philip De
Lancaster Esquire, lineally descended in the male line without a flaw
from Japhet, son of Noah.”

The bard was to dictate; the Lawyer was to write, and the Doctor was to
smoke his pipe, and make comments. As it was a business not to be
dismissed in a slight perfunctory manner, there was a huge can of
metheglin on the table to assist thought, for the _data_, that blind
David had to go upon, were rather of the scantiest; and when a
biographer has little or nothing before him, he must depend upon his
wits for matter.

David opened the consultation by observing, that, before they sate down
to their work, it was correctly in rule to make a libation to the
immortal memory of the excellent person, whose virtues they were about
to record; and he assured himself, that posterity would peruse the life
and actions of Mr. Philip De Lancaster with peculiar interest and
avidity.

After they had drank they began to deliberate, and the Doctor suggested,
that the first thing needful was to prove the life, before they narrated
the actions, of Mr. De Lancaster.

That is already settled, said the Lawyer, by entering, as I have done,
the date of his birth.

Pardon me, replied the Doctor, that entry is not quite authority, unless
you can show that he was _born to die_; for in many cases, which I have
met, the death of the object in question has been known to forerun the
birth.

Here is the date of his death, rejoined the Lawyer, copied from the
plate on his coffin; and by this it appears, that he lived to complete
a period of forty-three years, five months and three days.

_Sufficit!_ said Llewellyn; the plate upon his coffin is evidence. Now
let us understand what he employed himself upon during that period.

A silence ensued for a considerable time. David referred himself to the
metheglin; the other two to meditation on the past events of Philip’s
life, as materials for history.

He was very fond of angling, said the Lawyer.--He was so, replied the
Doctor, and you may put that down in the archives, only you need not
inform posterity, that he never got a bite.

Pooh! rejoined Davis, that naturally happened, because he was too
indolent to bait his hook.--He had an acknowledged partiality for the
game of chess.

Yes, and an acknowledged ignorance of it, said the Doctor. I am apt to
think, that it will be perfectly safe to record, that he was six feet
high--

Wanting half an inch, rejoined the Lawyer.

Pshaw! exclaimed the Doctor; if you begin to reckon up all that is
_wanting_, there will be no end to the account.

David now unmuzzled his oracle, and began to utter--Gentlemen, give me
leave to observe to you, that you wander from the points, that chiefly
constituted the exemplary character of the deceased personage, whose
incomparable qualities we are even now preparing to commemorate. He
possessed, as I can witness, a most laudable respect for the almost
miraculous powers of music: I do not say that Mr. Philip De Lancaster
was skilled in the practice of that sublime art; but I do say, that he
was at the pains of ascending the winding stair-case of my turret, and
of entering my chamber on the top of it, for the benevolent purpose of
employing me to expel the meagrims, or blue devils, as they are called,
from the possession they had taken of his lady, and restoring her to
health and spirits by the healing remedy of dulcet tones, elicited by me
from my harp.

A fiddlestick for your harp! exclaimed the man of medicine. I tell you,
that its dulcet tones were the very death of his wife. You may take that
from me, friend David, _in verbo medici_.

I’ll not take that from you, or any one else, friend or foe, retorted
the enraged musician; and now began an altercation between chemicals and
galenicals _versus_ chords and crotchets, which was maintained with
such heat, (both gentlemen being of the principality,) that in the
confusion of tongues all memory of poor Philip’s history was done away,
and to this hour no record, anecdote or account of that unfortunate
gentleman is any where to be found, save only what the historic tool of
the engraver has briefly inscribed upon the lacquered plate, that
ornaments his coffin.




CHAPTER VIII.

_Our History verges to its Conclusion.--Cornet Roberts arrives at
Penruth Abbey._


A very few days had elapsed since the event, recorded in our preceding
chapter had taken place, when intelligence reached the castle, that the
young heir of Penruth Abbey had arrived there from Lisbon. The servant,
who brought this news, was the bearer also of a letter from Cornet
Roberts to our hero, signifying that he was charged with a letter from
Major Wilson to his father, which with permission, he would have the
honour of delivering into his hands. The answer of our hero expressed
every thing, that hospitality and politeness could convey; but certain
reasons, still in force, prevailed with him to avoid, for the present at
least, a visit to the abbey. A very short time however brought young
Roberts to the castle, where he was received with all possible
cordiality. He had left his friend the Major on the point of setting out
for the review at Elvas, and as his marriage with Maria Devereux had
taken place, the bride and her father had been invited, and were
preparing to accompany him in the royal suite: in his letter to the
Colonel he announces his intention of coming over to England upon the
close of the campaign, and the family seat in Herefordshire was by order
of Mr. Devereux furnishing and preparing for his reception. Prosperity
had flowed in upon him; promotion awaited him, and every thing seemed
conspiring for his happiness.

Roberts in the mean time ingratiated himself to every body, old or
young, in the family of De Lancaster, by that modesty of mind and
manners, in which his sudden turn of fortune made no change. He made
frequent short excursions to the Abbey, where he had projected several
considerable works for the occupation and employment of the labouring
poor; but his delicacy never suffered him to ask John De Lancaster to
accompany him. John attended upon him however to the house of old Ap
Rees, when he went to invest him with the annuity settled upon him and
his son. The business was so cautiously introduced, and so delicately
conducted, that it created no very painful agitation on the part of the
old man--I have so deep a sense, said Roberts, of the injuries you have
received from the deceased person, whose property, but not whose
principles, I inherit, that so long as life is granted to me, I will be
the friend of you and all that may belong to you or yours; so be
assured--The venerable minstrel bowed his head; but the sad recollection
of his dear-loved daughter weighed upon his heart, and he was silent.

This and so many instances like this, occurred to strengthen and confirm
our hero’s high opinion of young Roberts, that in hearts like theirs
acquaintance soon was ripened into friendship; in proof of which it may
not be entirely out of place to record a circumstance, that happened at
the county races. Sir Arthur Floyd, the steward for the year preceding,
had nominated John De Lancaster as his successor in that office, and
when the time came round for his appearing in that character, his
grandfather and friends were of opinion, that he could not handsomely
absent himself. He proposed to Roberts to accompany him, and with some
hesitation he accepted it. At the ordinary John in right of office took
the chair; the cornet, as yet unknown to the gentlemen of the county, in
his riding dress, and out of uniform, attracted very little notice, and
declined all offers of introduction. It had been whispered however
between some at table, that a near relation of Sir David Ap Owen was
there, present and amongst them. When the glass had gone round briskly,
and Welch blood began to stir, a sporting kind of half gentleman at the
bottom of the table, who had been of the Ap Owen hunt, stood up and in a
loud voice desired to ask a question of the president: leave was
instantly given him from the chair to propose it.

He was ready enough with his words, and, addressing himself to De
Lancaster, spoke as follows--Mr. President, it is not my good fortune to
possess any great property in this county, but I hold it in as much
honor and respect, as any gentleman here present, being perhaps of as
antient standing, none excepted, not even yourself, Mr. De Lancaster,
whom we are all proud to see at the head of this table as our steward,
and shall be still prouder to see you there in good time as our
representative.

A clapping of hands, and a vehement clatter of glasses, ensued--The
speaker as soon as silence was restored, proceeded--Mr. President, I am
sorry to say that a great and grievous disgrace has been cast upon this
country by the infamous conduct of as dire a wretch, as ever went into
his grave unhanged. I mean the late Sir David Ap Owen; I speak out; I am
no slanderer. And now, Mr. President, I am informed, (whether truly or
not you perhaps can tell) that there is a near relation of that wretch,
who has so disgraced us, actually present in this company.

I am that person, said young Roberts, instantly starting up, and cutting
him short in his oration. I am nephew to the late worthy Sir Owen Ap
Owen, and of course first cousin to the late unworthy heir of his title
and estate. Now, sir, if my presence, gives you on that account any
umbrage, I am ready to leave the company, provided you go with me; for
having the honour to wear the King’s commission, I am not willing to
disgrace it by putting up with an affront from you, or any man alive,
who can prove himself a gentleman.

Several persons now rose at the same time, and called upon the orator
for an apology, when upon John De Lancaster’s appealing to be heard in
right of office, all were silent and sate down--Gentlemen, he said, I am
persuaded, that a very few words in the way of explanation will set this
matter right, without disturbing the peace of the company, or wounding
the feelings of any person present. It would be hard indeed upon my
friend Mr. Roberts, it would be hard upon me, who am proud to call him
by that name, if, because he inherits the estate of an antient and
respectable family in this county, the guilt of that man, through whose
hands it passed in its descent to him, could be supposed to cast the
slightest stain upon his character: that I am sure was not the purpose
of the gentleman, who was pleased to address himself to me. He spoke
upon the impulse of an honest indignation against one, who is far enough
removed from this assembly, not from the premeditated motive of putting
an affront upon a gentleman, whose company confers an honour,
wheresoever he bestows it. If therefore I conjecture rightly of my
worthy countryman at the other end of the table, I will put it to the
proof by calling upon him to pledge me in a toast, which I will give to
the health and prosperity of our new neighbour, Charles Roberts esquire,
the present heir and owner of Penruth Abbey.

Instantly, without a moment’s loss, the orator started on his legs, and
having filled his glass to the brim, with a loud voice, directed to Mr.
Roberts, cried amain, that he hoped he would accept of his apology, and
that he drank his health with all his heart. When the toast had gone
round, the young heir of the Ap Owens rose, and having made his
acknowledgments to the company, professed himself perfectly satisfied
with the testimony, which the gentleman, who addressed the president,
had been pleased to give of his good opinion of him. Thus by the
temperate and manly interference of our hero, the spirit of discord,
which for a time had worn so menacing an aspect, was expelled, and
harmony and goodfellowship reinstated in its stead.




CHAPTER IX.

_The History is concluded._


When John De Lancaster returned to Kray Castle, Edward Wilson
communicated to him a letter, which he had from Anderton, of which the
following is the substance:

       “Dear Sir!

“Having at length settled all my temporal affairs, nothing remains for
me in this world but to prepare my mind to meet that awful moment,
which must soon dismiss me from it. I rather think my complaint has
gained upon me, since my residence in London, and the physician, whom I
have consulted, tells me that I must positively lose no time in seeking
out some country-house in a better climate and a purer air. From what
passed between us on our passage, (which, though you may have forgotten,
I never can) I have cherished hopes, that perhaps your benevolence may
induce you to procure for me a situation in your neighbourhood, where I
may enjoy the comfort of your edifying and instructive conversation.
Could I obtain this blessing, it would be all I wish for; I should die
content. If you return a favourable answer, I shall instantly set out,
and I flatter myself that by easy stages I may accomplish the journey:
if on the contrary you reject my suit, I have only to thank you for
your favours past, resign myself to despair, and bid you everlastingly
farewel.”

When John De Lancaster had read thus far, he eagerly enquired of Wilson
what answer he had returned to this pitiable appeal. I have told him,
replied Wilson, that I am about to fix my residence in the parish, of
which I am the minister, and as my parsonage house is by the bounty of
your grandfather rendered perfectly commodious, and has the further
recommendation of being situated in a fine air and very beautiful spot,
I shall very gladly receive him in it, and shew him all the attentions
in my power for such time as it may suit him to make use of it.

The return of the post brought a letter from poor Anderton full of
acknowledgments for the generous offer, which he most gladly embraced,
and was eagerly employed in preparing for his journey.

Nothing now remained but to wait the expiration of the time allotted to
the forms of mourning. That interval was not chequered by a single
incident, that could disturb the happiness of our hero, or of any of
those worthy characters, whose story may have gained an interest in the
reader’s wishes.

Anderton, having slowly crawled through his long length of journey,
arrived at Kray Castle, where Edward Wilson waited for him; and having
lived to see the lovely daughter of his friend in perfect happiness and
high prosperity, retired with Wilson to his calm asylum, where after a
short period profitably employed he closed his days in peace.

Mr. Devereux, having delivered over to his son the management of his
concerns in Portugal, came with the Major and Maria to England, and
having paid a visit to the family at Kray Castle, established himself in
his fine old mansion in Herefordshire, in the centre of a noble
property, augmented by purchases and embellished by improvements.

Colonel Wilson lived to see his beloved Edward, after the decease of
Anderton, married to the amiable and accomplished daughter of Sir Arthur
Floyd. His frequent visits at Sir Arthur’s house, which was within a
very short distance of his own, had naturally given rise to an
attachment, which, when Anderton’s bequest had established him in
affluence, and not till then, he made known, and found his well-placed
passion was returned.

The good old Morgan kept a gay heart, and the gout at a distance.
Whilst he was for ever laying out a character for himself, which every
action of his life contradicted, no persuasion could divert him from
ordering new carriages to be built and fine horses to be bought in town
for the purpose of setting out his grandson with a splendid equipage,
that he had no wish for. He bustled over in prodigious haste to Glen
Morgan, as soon as ever the day was named for the wedding, and gave
directions that open house should be kept for three days after that
event took place, and free allowance without stint to all drunken
idlers, that chose to lend a hand to the draining of his cellars.

When his brother-in-law gravely took him to task, and remonstrated
against these lawless proceedings, as tending to produce nothing but
riot and disorder, he stuck boldly to his text, and would not waver;
contending that it was fit and right the tillers of the soil should
enjoy the produce of the soil, and, if they quarrelled over their cups,
they might fight it out over their cups for what he cared; a few broken
heads would set all to rights; and as for riots and disturbances, if the
county could not keep its own peace, he hoped he was not bound to keep
it for them.

In the mean time he was not wholly inattentive to his own person, but
found a half-crazed chattering Denbigh tailor to fit him out with a
flaming suit, laced down the seams, like the jacket of a drum-major; and
at the same time provided himself with a most tremendous perriwig, and
long cravat of Brussels lace. He was with difficulty prevented from
heaping tawdry ornaments and trinkets upon Amelia, that would totally
have destroyed all those charms, which the elegant simplicity of her own
taste knew so much better how to set off and recommend. But the Jew
Lyons exhibited a glittering show-box, and having trapped him into the
purchase of the French watch, that he bestowed upon Amelia, knew the
value of so good a customer.

Cecilia De Lancaster was the presiding spirit, that kept all things
straight and steady in their course: at her command they moved, by her
discretion they were governed and directed. Under her control joy was
not suffered to run riot, and the vagaries of old Morgan were kept
within bounds: to any other authority but her’s he paid no regard, and
had a way of parrying the railleries of Wilson, and the remonstrances of
De Lancaster.

That venerable and worthy personage preserved a dignified tranquillity.
A smile sate upon his countenance, and his eyes brightened when he
turned them on Amelia and his grandson. He caused a considerable length
of parchment to be added to his roll of pedigree, for the purpose of
leaving space for the future descendants from John De Lancaster and
Amelia Jones. He put old David upon composing an epithalamium, which
when written down as he dictated it, turned out to be very little
shorter than _the Last Lay of the Minstrel_. Neither was his own genius
unemployed, for he composed, and was at the pains of writing with his
own hand a set of maxims, which he intitled _rules for domestic
happiness in the married state_. They consisted chiefly of truisms,
which he was at the pains of proving; and of errors so obvious, that
examination could not make them clearer. He pointed out so many ways, by
which man and wife must render each other miserable, that he seemed to
have forgot, that the purport of his rules was to make them happy. So
little was this learned work adapted to the object held out in the
title, that, if it had been pasted up for general use on the door of a
church, it may be doubted if any, who had read it, would have entered
there to be married.

He delivered it however with much solemnity to his grandson--saying to
him--Here is a proof, my dear John, how seriously my thoughts have been
employed for your instruction: govern yourself by these rules, and you
will be happy.

If I govern myself by your example, John made answer, I shall have no
need of rules.

On the evening preceding the wedding-day, John drew Amelia aside, and
conducting her to the private chamber, which he made his study, produced
a case, which he said contained the family jewels of the De Lancasters
and Morgans, newly set--I have added nothing to them, he said, for I am
fully conscious they can add nothing to you: It is fit however that you
should have them, and wear them, when you see occasion: our friends seem
to wish it, and our fortune fully warrants it. When I shall put this
plain good ring upon your finger to-morrow, and confirm it as the
symbol of our union with an oath before the altar, trifles like these
jewels will have no further value, as the test of my affection: that is
made secure to you, not only by the graces of your person, which
ornaments cannot improve, but also by the virtues of your mind, which
time cannot impair.


                                FINIS.


           Harding and Wright, Printers, St. John’s Square.


       Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

                 hands presed=> hands pressed {pg 77}

            with that beolved=> with that beloved {pg 106}

            for these epeated=> for these repeated {pg 107}

                   know she is=> know he is {pg 140}

              The hopsitality=> The hospitality {pg 142}

            Did’nt you accept=> Didn’t you accept {pg 195}



        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER: A NOVEL; VOL. III ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


