The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Brownie of Bodsbeck, and Other Tales (Vol. 1 of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Brownie of Bodsbeck, and Other Tales (Vol. 1 of 2)


Author: James Hogg

Release date: October 6, 2012 [eBook #40955]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Henry Flower, junet and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK, AND OTHER TALES (VOL. 1 OF 2) ***




Produced by Henry Flower, junet and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









    THE
    BROWNIE OF BODSBECK;
    AND
    OTHER TALES.

    BY
    JAMES HOGG,
    AUTHOR OF "THE QUEEN'S WAKE," &c. &c.

    "What, has this thing appeared again to-night?"

    IN TWO VOLUMES.

    VOL. I.

    EDINBURGH;
    PRINTED FOR WILLIAM BLACKWOOD, PRINCE'S-STREET:
    AND
    JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET, LONDON.

    1818.




    TO
    THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
    LADY ANNE SCOTT,
    OF BUCCLEUCH.

      To HER, whose bounty oft hath shed
    Joy round the peasant's lowly bed,
    When trouble press'd and friends were few,
    And God and Angels only knew--
    To HER, who loves the board to cheer,
    And hearth of simple Cottager;
    Who loves the tale of rural kind,
    And wayward visions of his mind,
    I dedicate, with high delight,
    The themes of many a winter night.

      What other name on Yarrow's vale
    Can Shepherd choose to grace his tale?
    There other living name is none
    Heard with one feeling,--one alone.
    Some heavenly charm must name endear
    That all men love, and all revere!
    Even the rude boy of rustic form,
    And robes all fluttering to the storm,
    Whose roguish lip and graceless eye
    Inclines to mock the passer by,
    Walks by the Maid with softer tread,
    And lowly bends his burly head,
    Following with eye of milder ray
    The gentle form that glides away.
    The little school-nymph, drawing near,
    Says, with a sly and courteous leer,
    As plain as eye and manner can,
    "Thou lov'st me--bless thee, Lady Anne!"
    Even babes catch the beloved theme,
    And learn to lisp their Lady's name.

      The orphan's blessing rests on thee;
    Happy thou art, and long shalt be!
    'Tis not in sorrow, nor distress,
    Nor Fortune's power, to make thee less.
    The heart, unaltered in its mood,
    That joys alone in doing good,
    And follows in the heavenly road,
    And steps where once an Angel trode,--
    The joys within such heart that burn,
    No loss can quench, nor time o'erturn!
    The stars may from their orbits bend,
    The mountains rock, the heavens rend,--
    The sun's last ember cool and quiver,
    But these shall glow, and glow for ever!

      Then thou, who lov'st the shepherd's home,
    And cherishest his lowly dome,
    O list the mystic lore sublime,
    Of fairy tales of ancient time.
    I learned them in the lonely glen,
    The last abodes of living men;
    Where never stranger came our way
    By summer night, or winter day;
    Where neighbouring hind or cot was none,
    Our converse was with Heaven alone,
    With voices through the cloud that sung,
    And brooding storms that round us hung.

      O Lady, judge, if judge you may,
    How stern and ample was the sway
    Of themes like these, when darkness fell,
    And gray-hair'd sires the tales would tell!
    When doors were barr'd, and eldron dame
    Plied at her task beside the flame,
    That through the smoke and gloom alone
    On dim and umber'd faces shone--
    The bleat of mountain goat on high,
    That from the cliff came quavering by;
    The echoing rock, the rushing flood,
    The cataract's swell, the moaning wood,
    That undefined and mingled hum--
    Voice of the desart, never dumb!--
    All these have left within this heart
    A feeling tongue can ne'er impart;
    A wilder'd and unearthly flame,
    A something that's without a name.

      And, Lady, thou wilt never deem
    Religious tale offensive theme;
    Our creeds may differ in degree,
    But small that difference sure can be!
    As flowers which vary in their dyes,
    We all shall bloom in Paradise.
    As sire who loves his children well,
    The loveliest face he cannot tell,--
    So 'tis with us. We are the same,
    One faith, one Father, and one aim.

      And had'st thou lived where I was bred,
    Amid the scenes where martyrs bled,
    Their sufferings all to thee endear'd
    By those most honour'd and revered;
    And where the wild dark streamlet raves,
    Had'st wept above their lonely graves,
    Thou would'st have felt, I know it true,
    As I have done, and aye must do.
    And for the same exalted cause,
    For mankind's right, and nature's laws,
    The cause of liberty divine,
    Thy fathers bled as well as mine.

      Then be it thine, O noble Maid,
    On some still eve these tales to read;
    And thou wilt read, I know full well,
    For still thou lovest the haunted dell;
    To linger by the sainted spring,
    And trace the ancient fairy ring
    Where moonlight revels long were held
    In many a lone sequester'd field,
    By Yarrow dens and Ettrick shaw,
    And the green mounds of Carterhaugh.

      O for one kindred heart that thought
    As minstrel must, and lady ought,
    That loves like thee the whispering wood,
    And range of mountain solitude!
    Think how more wild the greenwood scene,
    If times were still as they have been;
    If fairies, at the fall of even,
    Down from the eye-brow of the heaven,
    Or some aërial land afar,
    Came on the beam of rising star;
    Their lightsome gambols to renew,
    From the green leaf to quaff the dew,
    Or dance with such a graceful tread,
    As scarce to bend the gowan's head!

      Think if thou wert, some evening still,
    Within thy wood of green Bowhill--
    Thy native wood!--the forest's pride!
    Lover or sister by thy side;
    In converse sweet the hour to improve
    Of things below and things above,
    Of an existence scarce begun,
    And note the stars rise one by one.
    Just then, the moon and daylight blending,
    To see the fairy bands descending,
    Wheeling and shivering as they came,
    Like glimmering shreds of human frame;
    Or sailing, 'mid the golden air,
    In skiffs of yielding gossamer.

      O, I would wander forth alone
    Where human eye hath never shone,
    Away o'er continents and isles
    A thousand and a thousand miles,
    For one such eve to sit with thee,
    Their strains to hear and forms to see!
    Absent the while all fears of harm,
    Secure in Heaven's protecting arm;
    To list the songs such beings sung,
    And hear them speak in human tongue;
    To see in beauty, perfect, pure,
    Of human face the miniature,
    And smile of being free from sin,
    That had not death impress'd within.
    Oh, can it ever be forgot
    What Scotland had, and now has not!

      Such scenes, dear Lady, now no more
    Are given, or fitted as before,
    To eye or ear of guilty dust;
    But when it comes, as come it must,
    The time when I, from earth set free,
    Shall turn the spark I fain would be;
    If there's a land, as grandsires tell,
    Where Brownies, Elves, and Fairies dwell,
    There my first visit shall be sped--
    Journeyer of earth, go hide thy head!
    Of all thy travelling splendour shorn,
    Though in thy golden chariot borne!
    Yon little cloud of many a hue
    That wanders o'er the solar blue,
    That curls, and rolls, and fleets away
    Beyond the very springs of day,--
    That do I challenge and engage
    To be my travelling equipage,
    Then onward, onward, far to steer,
    The breeze of Heaven my charioteer;
    The soul's own energy my guide,
    Eternal hope my all beside.
    At such a shrine who would not bow!
    Traveller of earth, where art thou now?

      Then let me for these legends claim,
    My young, my honour'd Lady's name;
    That honour is reward complete,
    Yet I must crave, if not unmeet,
    One little boon--delightful task
    For maid to grant, or minstrel ask!

      One day, thou may'st remember well,
    For short the time since it befel,
    When o'er thy forest-bowers of oak,
    The eddying storm in darkness broke;
    Loud sung the blast adown the dell,
    And Yarrow lent her treble swell;
    The mountain's form grew more sublime,
    Wrapt in its wreaths of rolling rime;
    And Newark Cairn, in hoary shroud,
    Appear'd like giant o'er the cloud:
    The eve fell dark, and grimly scowl'd,
    Loud and more loud the tempest howl'd;
    Without was turmoil, waste, and din,
    The kelpie's cry was in the linn,
    But all was love and peace within!
    And aye, between, the melting strain
    Pour'd from thy woodland harp amain,
    Which, mixing with the storm around,
    Gave a wild cadence to the sound.

      That mingled scene, in every part,
    Hath so impressed thy shepherd's heart,
    With glowing feelings, kindling bright
    Some filial visions of delight,
    That almost border upon pain,
    And he would hear those strains again.
    They brought delusions not to last,
    Blending the future with the past;
    Dreams of fair stems, in foliage new,
    Of flowers that spring where others grew
    Of beauty ne'er to be outdone,
    And stars that rise when sets the sun;
    The patriarchal days of yore,
    The mountain music heard no more,
    With all the scene before his eyes,
    A family's and a nation's ties--
    Bonds which the Heavens alone can rend,
    With Chief, with Father, and with Friend.
    No wonder that such scene refin'd
    Should dwell on rude enthusiast's mind!
    Strange his reverse!--He little wist--
    Poor inmate of the cloud and mist!
    That ever he, as friend, should claim
    The proudest Caledonian name.

        J. H.

    ELTRIVE LAKE, _April 1st, 1818_.




THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK.




CHAPTER I.


"It will be a bloody night in Gemsop this," said Walter of Chapelhope,
as he sat one evening by the side of his little parlour fire, and wrung
the rim of his wet bonnet into the grate. His wife sat by his side,
airing a pair of clean hosen for her husband, to replace his wet ones.
She looked stedfastly in his face, but uttered not a word;--it was one
of those looks that cannot be described, but it bespoke the height of
curiosity, mingled with a kind of indefinite terror. She loved and
respected her husband, and sometimes was wont to teaze or cajole him
from his purpose; but one glance of his eye, or scowl of his eyebrow,
was a sufficient admonition to her when she ventured to use such
freedom.

The anxious stare that she bent on his face at this time was enquiry
enough, what he meant by the short and mysterious sentence he had just
uttered; but from the fulness of his heart he had said that which he
could not recal, and had no mind to commit himself farther. His eldest
son, John, was in the room too, which he had not remarked before he
spoke, and therefore he took the first opportunity to change the
subject. "Gudewife," said he, tartly, "what are ye sittin glowrin like a
bendit wulcat there for? Gae away and get me something to eat; I'm like
to fa' atwae wi' sheer hunger."

"Hunger, father!" said the lad; "I'm sure I saw ye take as much meat to
the hill with you as might have served six."

Walter looked first over the one shoulder at him, and then over the
other, but, repressing his wrath, he sat silent about the space of two
minutes, as if he had not heard what the youth said. "Callant," then
said he, with the greatest seeming composure, "rin away to the hill, an'
see after the eild nowt; ca' them up by the Quare Burn, an' bide wi'
them till they lie down, gin that sudna be till twal o'clock at
night--Gae away when I bid ye--What are ye mumgin at?" And saying so, he
gave him such a thwack on the neck and shoulders with the wet bonnet as
made him make the best of his way to the door. Whether he drove the
young cattle as far as the Quare Burn, or whether he looked after them
that night or not, Walter made no farther enquiry.

He sat still by his fire wrapt in deep thought, which seemed to increase
his uneasy and fretful mood. Maron Linton, (for that was the goodwife of
Chapelhope's name) observing the bad humour of her husband, and knowing
for certain that something disagreeable had befallen him, wisely forbore
all intermeddling or teazing questions respecting the cause. Long
experience had taught her the danger of these. She bustled about, and
set him down the best fare that the house afforded; then, taking up her
tobacco pipe, she meditated an escape into the kitchen. She judged that
a good hearty meal by himself might somewhat abate his chagrin; and,
besides, the ominous words were still ringing in her ears--"It will be a
bloody night in Gemsop this"--and she longed to sound the shepherds that
were assembled around the kitchen fire, in order to find out their
import. Walter, however, perceiving her drift, stopped her short
with--"Gudewife, whar are ye gaun sae fast--Come back an' sit down here,
I want to speak t'ye."

Maron trembled at the tone in which these words were spoken, but
nevertheless did as she was desired, and sat down again by the fire.
"Weel, Watie, what is't?" said she, in a low and humble tone.

Walter plied his spoon for some time without deigning any reply; then
turning full upon her, "Has Kate been in her bed every night this
week?" asked he seriously.

"Dear gudeman, whaten a question's that to speer at me--What can hae put
sic a norie i' your head as that?"

"That's no answerin my question, Maron, but speerin ither twa instead
o't--I axt ye gin Kate hadna been out o' her bed for some nights
bygane."

"How sude I ken ony thing about that, gudeman?--ye may gang an' speer at
her--Out o' her bed, quotha!--Na--there'll nae young skempy amang them
wile her out o' her bed i'the night-time.--Dear gudeman, what has put it
i'your head that our bairn stravaigs i'the night-time?"

"Na, na, Maron, there's nae mortal soul will ever gar ye answer to the
point."

"Dear gudeman, wha heard ever tell o' a _mortal_ soul?--the soul's no
mortal at a'--Didna ye hear our ain worthy curate-clerk say"----

"O, Maron! Maron! ye'll aye be the auld woman, if the warld sude turn
upside-down!--Canna ye answer my question simply, ay or no, as far as ye
ken, whether our daughter has been out o' her bed at midnight for some
nights bygane or no?--If ye ken that she has, canna ye tell me sae at
aince, without ganging about the bush? it's a thing that deeply concerns
us baith."

"Troth, gudeman, gin she hae been out o' her bed, mony a honest man's
bairn has been out o' her bed at midnight afore her, an' nae ill in her
mind nouther--the thing's as common as the rising o' the se'en sterns."

Walter turned round towards his meal, after casting a look of pity and
despair upon his yokefellow, who went on at great length defending the
equivocal practice of young women who might deem it meet and convenient
to leave their beds occasionally by night; for that, without some mode
of private wooing, it was well known that no man in the country could
possibly procure a wife, for that darkness rendered a promise serious,
which passed in open day for a mere joke, or words of course; and at
length Maron Linton, with more sagacity than usual, concluded her
arguments with the following home remark:--"Ye ken fu' weel, gudeman, ye
courtit me i'the howe o' the night yoursel; an' Him that kens the heart
kens weel that I hae never had cause to rue our bits o' trysts i'the
dark--Na, na! mony's the time an' aft that I hae blest them, an' thought
o' them wi' pleasure! We had ae kind o' happiness then, Watie, we hae
another now, an' we'll hae another yet."

There was something in this appeal that it would have been unnatural to
have resisted. There is a tenderness in the recollection of early scenes
of mutual joy and love, that invariably softens the asperity of our
nature, and draws the heart by an invisible bond toward the sharer of
these; but when they are at one view connected with the present and the
future, the delight receives a tinge of sublimity. In short, the appeal
was one of the most happy that ever fell from the lips of a simple and
ignorant, though a well-meaning woman. It was not lost upon Walter; who,
though of a rough exterior and impatient humour, was a good man. He took
his wife's hand and squeezed it, while the pupil of his eye expanded
like that of a huge mountain ram, when he turns it away from the last
ray of the setting sun.

"My gude auld wife," said he, "God bless ye!--Ye hae bits o' queer gates
whiles, but I wadna part wi' ye, or see ane o' yer grey hairs wranged,
for a' the ewes on the Hermon Law."--Maron gave two or three sobs, and
put the corner of her check-apron upon the eye that was next
Walter.--"Fair fa' your heart, Maron," said he, "we'll say nae mair
about it; but, my woman, we maun crack about our bits o' hame affairs,
an' I had the strongest reasons for coming to the truth o' yon; however,
I'll try ither means.--But, Maron Linton, there's anither thing, that in
spite o' my heart is like to breed me muckle grief, an' trouble, an'
shame.--Maron, has the Brownie o' Bodsbeck been ony mair seen about the
town?"

"Troth, gudeman, ye're aye sae hard i' the belief--wi' a' your kindness
to me and mine, ye hae a dour, stiff, unbowsome kind o' nature in
ye--it'll hardly souple whan steepit i' yer ain e'esight--but I can tell
ye for news, ye'll no hae a servant about yer house, man, woman, nor
boy, in less than a fortnight, if this wicked and malevolent spirit
canna be put away--an' I may say i' the language o' Scripture, 'My name
is Legion, for we are many.' It's no ae Brownie, nor twa, nor
half-a-score, that's about the house, but a great hantle--they say
they're ha'f deils ha'f fock--a thing that I dinna weel understand. But
how many bannocks think ye I hae baken in our house these eight days,
an' no a crust o' them to the fore but that wee bit on your trencher?"

"I little wot, gudewife; maybe half-a-dizen o' dizens."

"Half-a-dizen o' dizens, gudeman!--aye sax dizen o' dizens!--a' the meal
girnels i' the country wadna stand it, let abee the wee bit meal ark o'
Chapelhope."

"Gudewife, I'm perfectly stoundit. I dinna ken what to say, or what to
think, or what to do; an' the mair sae o' what I have heard sin' I gaed
to the hill--Auld John o' the Muir, our herd, wha I ken wadna tell a lee
for the Laird o' Drumelzier's estate, saw an unco sight the night afore
last."

"Mercy on us, gudeman! what mair has been seen about the town?"

"I'll tell ye, gudewife--on Monanday night he cam yont to stop the ewes
aff the hogg-fence, the wind being eissel--it was a wee after midnight,
an' the moon wasna just gane down--he was sittin i' the scug o' a bit
cleuch-brae, when, or ever he wist, his dog Keilder fell a gurrin' an'
gurrin', as he had seen something that he was terrified for--John took
him aneath his plaid, an' held him, thinkin it was some sheep-stealers;
but or it was lang he saw a white thing an' a black thing comin' up the
Houm close thegither; they cam by within three catloups o' him--he
grippit his cudgel firm, an' was aince gaun to gie them strength o' arm,
but his power failed him, an' a' his sinnens grew like dockans; there
was a kind o' glamour cam o'er his een too, for a' the hope an' the
heaven grew as derk as tar an' pitch--but the settin moon shone even in
their faces, and he saw them as weel as it had been fore-day. The tane
was a wee bit hurklin crile of an unearthly thing, as shrinkit an' wan
as he had lien seven years i' the grave; the tither was like a young
woman--an' what d'ye think? he says he'll gang to death wi't that it was
outher our dochter or her wraith."

Maron lifted up her eyes and her clasped hands toward the ceiling, and
broke out with the utmost vehemence into the following raving
ejaculation:--"O mercy, mercy! Watie Laidlaw!--O, may Him that dwalls
atween the Sherubeams be wi' us, and preserve us and guide us, for we
are undone creatures!--O, Watie Laidlaw, Watie Laidlaw! there's the
wheel within the wheel, the mystery o' Babylon, the mother of harlots,
and abominations of the earth----"

"Maron Linton!--What are ye sayin?--Haud yer tongue, Maron Linton."

"O gudeman, I thought it was the young fallows ye jaloosed her wi'--I
wish it had. I wad rather hae seen her i'the black stool, in the place
where repentance is to be hoped for; but now she's i'the deil's ain
hands. I jaloosed it, Watie--I kend it--I was sure o't lang syne--our
bairn's changed--she's transplanted--she's no Keaty Laidlaw now, but an
unearthly creature--we might weel hae kend that flesh an' blude cude
never be sae bonny--Goodman, I hae an awsome tale to tell ye--Wha think
ye was it that killed Clavers' Highlanders?"

"That, I suppose, will remain a mystery till the day when a' secrets
will be cleared up, an' a' the deeds o' darkness brought to light."

"Sae may it be, Watie! Sae may it be! But it was neither ane nor other
but our ain only dochter Kate."

"Ye're ravin, Maron--troth, ye're gaun daft--a bit sklendry lassie o'
aughteen kill sae mony armed Highlanders?--Hout fye! keep within bounds,
Maron."

"I heard her wi' thir lugs it's i'my head--Stannin on that very room
floor, I heard her gie the orders to her Brownie. She was greetin whan I
cam in--I listened and heard her saying, while her heart was like to
loup, 'Wae's me! O wae's me! or mid-day their blood will be rinning like
water!--The auld an' the young, the bonny an' the gude, the sick an' the
woundit--That blude may cry to Heaven, but the cauld earth will drink it
up; days may be better, but waur they canna be! Down wi' the clans,
Brownie, and spare nae ane.' In less than ten minutes after that, the
men were found dead. Now, Watie, this is a plain an' positive truth."

Walter's blood curdled within him at this relation. He was
superstitious, but he always affected to disbelieve the existence of the
Brownie, though the evidences were so strong as not to admit of any
doubt; but this double assurance, that his only daughter, whom he loved
above all the world besides, was leagued with evil spirits, utterly
confounded him. He charged his wife, in the most solemn manner, never
more, during her life, to mention the mysterious circumstance relating
to the death of the Highland soldiers. It is not easy to conceive a pair
in more consummate astonishment than Walter and his spouse were by the
time the conversation had reached this point. The one knew not what to
think, to reject, or believe--the other believed all, without
comprehending a single iota of that she did believe; her mind
endeavoured to grasp a dreadful imaginary form, but the dimensions were
too ample for its reasoning powers; they were soon dilated, burst, and
were blown about, as it were, in a world of vision and terror.




CHAPTER II.


Before proceeding with the incidents as they occurred, which is the
common way of telling a story in the country, it will be necessary to
explain some circumstances alluded to in the foregoing chapter.

Walter Laidlaw rented the extensive bounds of Chapelhope from the Laird
of Drummelzier. He was a substantial, and even a wealthy man, as times
went then, for he had a stock of 3000 sheep, cattle, and horses; and
had, besides, saved considerable sums of money, which he had lent out to
neighbouring farmers who were not in circumstances so independent as
himself.

He had one only daughter, his darling, who was adorned with every
accomplishment which the country could then afford, and with every
grace and beauty that a country maiden may possess. He had likewise two
sons, who were younger than she, and a number of shepherds and female
servants.

The time on which the incidents here recorded took place, was, I
believe, in the autumn of the year 1685, the most dismal and troublous
time that these districts of the south and west of Scotland ever saw, or
have since seen. The persecution for religion then raged in its wildest
and most unbridled fury: the Covenanters, or the whigs, as they were
then called, were proscribed, imprisoned, and at last hunted down like
wild beasts. Graham, Viscount of Dundee, better known by the detested
name of Clavers, set loose his savage troopers upon those peaceful
districts, with peremptory orders to plunder, waste, disperse, and
destroy the conventiclers, wherever they might be found.

All the outer parts of the lands of Chapelhope are broken into thousands
of deep black ruts, called by the country people _moss haggs_. Each of
the largest of these has a green stripe along its bottom; and in this
place in particular they are so numerous, so intersected and complex in
their lines, that, as a hiding-place, they are unequalled--men, foxes,
and sheep, may all there find cover with equal safety from being
discovered, and may hide for days and nights without being aware of one
another. The neighbouring farms to the westward abound with inaccessible
rocks, caverns, and ravines. To these mountains, therefore, the
shattered remains of the fugitives from the field of Bothwell Bridge, as
well as the broken and persecuted whigs from all the western and
southern counties, fled as to their last refuge. Being unacquainted,
however, with the inhabitants of the country in which they had taken
shelter--with their religious principles, or the opinions which they
held respecting the measures of government--they durst not trust them
with the secret of their retreat. They had watches set, sounds for
signals, and skulked away from one hiding-place to another at the
approach of the armed troop, the careless fowler, or the solitary
shepherd; yea, such precautions were they obliged to use, that they
often fled from the face of one another.

From the midst of that inhospitable wilderness--from those dark mosses
and unfrequented caverns--the prayers of the persecuted race nightly
arose to the throne of the Almighty--prayers, as all testified who heard
them, fraught with the most simple pathos, as well as the most bold and
vehement sublimity. In the solemn gloom of the evening, after the last
rays of day had disappeared, and again in the morning before they began
to streamer the east, the song of praise was sung to that Being, under
whose fatherly chastisement they were patiently suffering. These psalms,
always chaunted with ardour and wild melody, and borne on the light
breezes of the twilight, were often heard at a great distance. The heart
of the peasant grew chill, and his hairs stood all on end, as he hasted
home to alarm the cottage circle with a tale of horror. Lights were seen
moving by night in wilds and caverns where human thing never resided,
and where the foot of man seldom had trode.

The shepherds knew, or thought they knew, that no human being frequented
these places; and they believed, as well they might, that whole hordes
of spirits had taken possession of their remote and solitary dells. They
lived in terror and consternation. Those who had no tie in the country
left it, and retreated into the vales, where the habitations of men are
numerous, and where the fairy, the brownie, or the walking ghost, is
rarely seen. Such as had friends whom they could not leave, or sheep and
cattle upon the lands, as the farmers and shepherds had, were obliged to
remain, but their astonishment and awe continued to increase. They knew
there was but one Being to whom they could apply for protection against
these unearthly visitants; family worship was begun both at evening and
morning in the farmers' hall and the most remote hamlet; and that age
introduced a spirit of devotion into those regions, which one hundred
and thirty years continuance of the utmost laxity and indecision in
religious principles has not yet been able wholly to eradicate.

It is likewise necessary to mention here, though perfectly well known,
that every corner of that distracted country was furnished with a
gownsman, to instruct the inhabitants in the _mild_ and _benignant_
principles of prelacy, but chiefly to act as spies upon the detested
whigs. In the fulfilment of this last task they were not remiss; they
proved the most inveterate and incorrigible enemies that the poor
covenanters had, even though heaven, earth, and hell seemed to have
combined against them.

The officiating priest at the kirk of Saint Mary of the Lowes had been
particularly active in this part of his commission. The smallest number
could not be convened for the purposes of public devotion--two or three
stragglers could not be seen crossing the country, but information was
instantly sent to Clavers, or some one of his officers; and, at the same
time, these devotional meetings were always described to be of the most
atrocious and rebellious nature. The whigs became grievously incensed
against this ecclesiastic, for, in the bleakest mountain of their native
land, they could not enjoy a lair in common with the foxes and the
wild-goats in peace, nor worship their God without annoyance in the dens
and caves of the earth. Their conventicles, though held in places ever
so remote, were broke in upon and dispersed by armed troops, and their
ministers and brethren carried away to prisons, to banishment, and to
death. They waxed desperate; and what will not desperate men do? They
way-laid, and seized upon one of the priest's emissaries by night, a
young female, who was running on a message to Grierson of Lag. Overcome
with fear at being in custody of such frightful-looking fellows, with
their sallow cheeks and long beards, she confessed the whole, and gave
up her dispatches. They were of the most aggravated nature. Forthwith
two or three of the most hardy of the whigs, without the concurrence or
knowledge of their brethren, posted straight to the Virgin's chapel that
very night, shot the chaplain, and buried him at a small distance from
his own little solitary mansion; at the same time giving out to the
country, that he was a sorcerer, an adulterer, and a character every way
evil. His name has accordingly been handed down to posterity as a most
horrid necromancer.

This was a rash and unpremeditated act; and, as might well have been
foreseen, the cure proved worse than the disease. It brought the armed
troops upon them both from the east and the west. Dundee came to
Traquair, and stationed companies of troops in a line across the
country. The Laird of Lag placed a body of men in the narrowest pass of
Moffatdale, in the only path by which these mountains are accessible.
Thus all communication was cut off between the mountain-men and the
western counties; for every one who went or came by that way, these
soldiers took prisoner, searched, and examined; and one lad, who was
coming from Moffat, carrying more bread than they thought he could well
account for, they shot dead on the spot just as he had dropt on his
knees to pray.

A curate, named Clerk, still remained, to keep an eye upon the whigs and
pester them. He had the charge of two chapels in that vicinity; the one
at a place now called Kirkhope, which was dedicated to Saint Irene, a
saint of whom the narrator of this story could give no account. The
other was dedicated to Saint Lawrence; the remains of it are still to be
seen at Chapelhope, in a small circular inclosure on the west side of
the burn. Clerk was as malevolent to the full against the proscribed
party as his late brother, but he wanted the abilities of the deceased;
he was ignorant, superstitious, and had assumed a part of the fanaticism
in religion of the adverse party, for it was the age and the country of
fanaticism, and nothing else would take. By that principally he had
gained some influence among his hearers, on whom he tried every
stimulant to influence them against the whigs. The goodwife of
Chapelhope was particularly attached to him and his tenets; he held her
completely in leading-strings; her concience approved of every thing, or
disapproved, merely as he directed; he flattered her for her deep
knowledge in true and sound divinity and the Holy Scriptures, although
of both she was grossly ignorant. But she had learned from her preceptor
a kind of cant--a jargon of religious terms and sentences of Scripture
mixed, of which she had great pride but little understanding. She was
just such a character as would have been a whig, had she ever had an
opportunity of hearing or conversing with any of that sect. Nothing
earthly could be so truly ludicrous as some of her exhibitions in a
religious style. The family and servants were in general swayed by their
mistress, who took a decided part with Clerk in all his schemes against
the whigs, and constantly dispatched one of her own servants to carry
his messages of information to the king's officers. This circumstance
soon became known to the mountain-men, and though they were always
obliged to take refuge on the lands of Chapelhope by day, they avoided
carefully all communication with the family or shepherds (for several of
the shepherds on that farm lived in cottages at a great distance from
one another and from the farm-house.)

Walter despised Clerk and his tenets most heartily; he saw that he was
a shallow, hypocritical, and selfish being, and that he knew nothing of
the principles in which he pretended to instruct them; therefore he
sorely regretted the influence that he had gained over his family.
Neither did he approve of the rigid and rebellious principles which he
believed the Covenanters professed. When he met with any man, or
community of men, who believed firmly in any thing and held it sacred,
Walter revered that, and held it sacred likewise; but it was rather from
a deference to the belief and feelings of his fellow creatures than his
own conviction. In short, Walter was an honest, conscientious, good,
old-fashioned man, but he made no great fuss about religion, and many
supposed that he did not care a pin who was right or who was wrong.

On the 23d of August, Clavers (I think it best to denominate him so, as
he is always called by that name in the country,) dispatched nineteen
men from Traquair, under the command of one Copland, a gentleman
volunteer in his troop, and a very brave young man, to gain intelligence
concerning the murder of the curate, and use every means to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Copland and his men came to the mansion of the
late chaplain, where they remained all the night, and made every enquiry
that they could concerning the murderers. Several witnesses were brought
in and examined, and among others the very identical girl whom the whigs
took prisoner, and robbed of the dispatches. She had heard the letter
read by one of the gang who seized her, while the rest stood and
listened. It bore, "that great numbers of the broken and rebellious
traitors kenneled in the wilds around Loch-Skene, from whence they
committed depredations on all the countries about; that they likewise
made religious incursions into those districts, where great multitudes
attended their inflammatory harangues." It also stated, "that a noted
incendiary was to preach on such a day in Kirkinhope Linn, where the
whole group might easily be surrounded and annihilated; that many of
them were armed with guns, bludgeons, and broadswords, but that they
were the most cowardly, heartless dogs alive; and that he himself, who
had private and certain information of all their hiding places, would
engage to rid the country of them in a few days, if Lag would allow him
but one company of soldiers."

Copland now began to suspect that his force was too small to accomplish
any thing of moment; he determined, however, to make a dash into the
wild next morning, and, if possible, to seize some prisoners, and
thereby gain more accurate information. On the morning of the 24th,
having procured two trusty guides, he proceeded on his expedition. He
and nine of his followers went up by a place called Sheilhope, the other
nine by Chapelhope--they were to scour the broken ground, take all those
prisoners whom they found skulking, fire upon such as refused to stand,
and meet on a certain height at noon. Copland and his party reached the
appointed place without making any reprisal; they perceived some
stragglers on the heights and rocks at a great distance, who always
vanished away, like beings not of this world. Three of the other party
took one poor lad prisoner, who was so spent and emaciated that he had
been unable to fly at the signal-sound; but so intent were they on blood
that he was not ever brought before their leader, who never so much as
knew of the capture.

The guide was wont to relate the circumstances of this poor man's trial
and execution, for, but for him, no such thing would ever have been
known; the death of a whig, or a straggler of any kind, was then a
matter of no concern--They were three Brae-mar Highlanders who took him;
like the most part of his associates, he answered their questions in a
surly manner, and by the most cutting retorts, which particularly
enraged a Donald Farquharson, one of the party, against him. "Weel,
I'll pe pitting you to 'e test, and tat fery shun, my coot freen," said
Donald; "and I'll just pe teeling you, eince for a', tat ye haif ne meer
but tway meenets and a half to leef."

The poor forlorn wight answered, "that he expected no better at their
hands,--that he desired no longer time, and he hoped they would bear
patiently with him for that short space." He then kneeled down and
prayed most fervently, while Donald, who wanted only a hair to make a
tether of, as the saying is, seemed watching diligently for a word at
which to quarrel. At length he spoke words to the following purport.
"Father, forgive these poor misled creatures, as I forgive them; they
are running blindly upon a wrong path, and without the power of thy
grace they shall never gain the right one more." Donald, who did not
well understand the dialect in which the prisoner prayed, looked
shrewdly at his companions. "Dugald More," said he--"Dugald More, fat's
'e man saying?"

"He is praying," replied the other, "that we may lose our way, and never
find it more."

"Cot t--n 'e soul o' 'e tief, is he?" said Donald, and ran him through
with his bayonet.

The wounded man groaned, and cried most piteously, and even called out
"murder," but there was none to rescue or regard him. The soldiers,
however, cut the matter short, by tossing him into a deep hole in the
morass, where he sunk in the mire and was seen no more.

When Copland arrived at the place of rendezvous, five out of his ten
associates were no where to be seen, nor did they make their appearance,
although he tarried there till two in the afternoon. The guide then
conducted him by the path on which those missing should have come, and
on arriving at a narrow pass in Chapelhope, he found the bodies of the
four soldiers and their guide mangled and defaced in no ordinary
way; and judging from this that he had been long enough in that
neighbourhood, he hasted back to Traquair with the news of the loss.
Clavers is said to have broke out into the most violent rage, and to
have sworn that night by the Blessed Virgin and all the Holy Trinity,
utterly to extirpate the seed of the d--d whining psalm-singing race
from the face of the earth, and that ere Beltein there should not be as
much whig blood in Scotland as would make a dish of soup to a dog. He
however concealed from the privy council the loss of these five men, nor
did they ever know of it to this day.




CHAPTER III.


Things were precisely in this state, when the goodman of Chapelhope,
taking his plaid and staff, went out to the heights one misty day in
autumn to drive off a neighbour's flock from his pasture; but, as Walter
was wont to relate the story himself, when any stranger came there on a
winter evening, as long as he lived, it may haply be acceptable to the
curious, and the lovers of rustic simplicity, to read it in his own
words, although he drew it out to an inordinate length, and perhaps kept
his own personal feelings and prowess too much in view for the
fastidious or critical reader to approve.

"It was on a mirk misty day in September," said Walter, "I mind it
weel, that I took my plaid about me, and a bit gay steeve aik stick in
my hand, and away I sets to turn aff the Winterhopeburn sheep. The wind
had been east-about a' that harst, I hae some sma' reason ne'er to
forget it, and they had amaist gane wi' a' the gairs i' our North Grain.
I weel expected I wad find them a' in the scaithe that dark day, and I
was just amind to tak them hame in a drove to Aidie Andison's door, and
say, 'Here's yer sheep for ye, lad; ye maun outher keep them better, or
else, gude faith, I'll keep them for ye.'--I had been crost and put
about wi' them a' that year, and I was just gaun to bring the screw to
the neb o' the mire-snipe.--Weel, off I sets--I had a special dog
at my feet, and a bit gay fine stick in my hand, and I was rather
cross-natured that day--'Auld Wat's no gaun to be o'er-trampit wi' nane
o' them, for a' that's come and gane yet,' quo' I to mysel as I gaed up
the burn.--Weel, I slings aye on wi' a gay lang step; but, by the time
that I had won the Forkings, I gat collied amang the mist, sae derk,
that fient a spark I could see--Stogs aye on through cleuch and gill,
and a' the gairs that they used to spounge, but, to my great mervel, I
can nouther see a hair of a ewe's tail, nor can I hear the bleat of a
lamb, or the bell of a wether--No ane, outher of my ain or ither
folks!--'Ay,' says I to mysel, 'what can be the meaning o' this? od,
there has been somebody here afore me the day!' I was just standin
looking about me amang the lang hags that lead out frae the head o' the
North Grain, and considering what could be wort of a' the sheep, when I
noticed my dog, Reaver, gaun coursing away forrit as he had been setting
a fox. What's this, thinks I--On he gangs very angry like, cocking his
tail, and setting up his birses, till he wan to the very brink of a deep
hag; but when he gat there, my certy, he wasna lang in turning! Back he
comes, by me, an' away as the deil had been chasing him; as terrified a
beast I saw never--Od, sir, I fand the very hairs o' my head begin to
creep, and a prinkling through a' my veins and skin like needles and
preens.--'God guide us!' thinks I, 'what can this _be_?' The day was
derk, derk; for I was in the very stamoch o' the cludd, as it were;
still it was the day time, an' the e'e o' Heaven was open. I was as near
turned an' run after my tike as ever I'll miss, but I just fand a stound
o' manheid gang through my heart, an' forrit I sets wi' a' the vents o'
my head open. 'If it's flesh an' blude,' thinks I, 'or it get the
owrance o' auld Wat Laidlaw, od it sal get strength o' arm for aince.'
It was a deep hag, as deep as the wa's o' this house, and a strip o'
green sward alang the bottom o't; and when I came to the brow, what does
I see but twa lang liesh chaps lying sleeping at ither's sides, baith
happit wi' the same maud. 'Hallo!' cries I, wi' a stern voice, 'wha hae
we here?' If ye had but seen how they lookit when they stertit up; od,
ye wad hae thought they were twa scoundrels wakened frae the dead! I
never saw twa mair hemp-looking dogs in my life.

'What are ye feared for, lads? Whaten twa blades are ye? Or what are ye
seeking in sic a place as this?'

'This is a derk day, gudeman.'

'This is a derk day, gudeman! That's sic an answer as I heard never. I
wish ye wad tell me something I dinna ken--and that's wha ye are, and
what ye're seeking here?'

'We're seeking nought o' yours, friend.'

'I dinna believe a word o't--ye're nae folk o' this country--I doubt ye
ken o'er weel what stealing o' sheep is--But if ye winna tell me plainly
and honestly your business here, the deil be my inmate gin I winna knock
your twa heads thegither.'

'There is a gude auld say, honest man, _It is best to let sleeping dogs
lie, they may rise and bite you_.'

'Bite _me_, lad!--Rise an' bite _me_!--I wad like to see a dog on a' the
heights o' Chapelhope that wad snarl at me, let be to bite!'

"I had a gay steeve dour aik stick in my hand, an' wi' that I begoud to
heave't up, no to strike them, but just to gi'e them a glisk o' the
coming-on that was in't. By this time they were baith on their feet; and
the ane that was neist me he gi'es the tabie of his jockey-coat a fling
back, and out he pu's a braid sword frae aneath it--an' wi' the same
blink the ither whups a sma' spear out o' the heart o' his aik stick,
'Here's for ye then, auld camstary,' says they; 'an unlucky fish gets an
unlucky bait.' Od sir, I was rather stoundit; I began to look o'er my
shouther, but there was naething there but the swathes o' mist. What wad
I hae gien for twa minutes of auld John o' the Muchrah! However, there
was nae time to lose--it was come fairly to the neb o' the mire-snipe
wi' me. I never was gude when taken by surprise a' my life--gie me a wee
time, an' I turn quite foundemental then--sae, to tell the truth, in my
hurry I took the flier's part, flang the plaid frae me, and ran off up
the hag as fast as my feet could carry me, an' a' the gate the
ragamuffian wi' the sword was amaist close at my heels. The bottom o'
the hag was very narrow, twa could hardly rin abreast. My very bluid
began to rise at being chased by twa skebels, and I thought I heard a
voice within me, crying, 'Dinna flee, Wat Laidlaw! dinna flee, auld Wat!
ye hae a gude cause by the end!' I wheeled just round in a moment, sir,
and drew a desperate straik at the foremost, an' sae little kend the
haniel about fencing, that instead o' sweeing aff my downcome wi' his
sword, he held up his sword-arm to save his head--I gart his arm just
snap like a pipe-stapple, and down fell his bit whittle to the ground,
and he on aboon it. The tither, wi' his sma' spear, durstna come on,
but ran for it; I followed, and was mettler o' foot than he, but I
durstna grip him, for fear he had run his bit spit through my sma-fairns
i' the struggle, for it was as sharp as a lance, but I keepit a little
back till I gat the end o' my stick just i' the how o' his neck, and
then I gae him a push that soon gart him plew the flow with his nose. On
aboon him I gets, and the first thing I did was to fling away his bit
twig of a sword--I gart it shine through the air like a fiery
dragon--then I took him by the cuff o' the neck, and lugged him back to
his neighbour, wha was lying graning in the hag. 'Now, billies,' says I,
'ye shall answer face to face, it wad hae been as good soon as syne;
tell me directly wha ye are, and what's your business here, or, d'ye
hear me, I'll tye ye thegither like twa tikes, and tak ye to them that
will gar ye speak.'

'Ah! lack-a-day, lack-a-day!' said the wounded man, 'ye're a rash,
foolish, passionate man, whaever ye be.'

'Ye're maybe no very far wrang there,' quo' I; 'but for aince, I trow, I
had gude reason. Ye thought to kill _me_ wi' your bits o' shabbles o'
swords!'

'In the first place then,' said he, 'ken that we wadna hae shed ae drap
o' your blood, nor wranged a hair o' your head--all that we wanted was
to get quit of ye, to keep ye out o' danger an' scaith. Ye hae made a
bonny day's wark on't truly, we had naething in view but your ain
safety--but sin' ye will ken ye maun ken; we belang to a poor proscribed
remnant, that hae fled from the face of a bloody persecution. We have
left all, and lost all, for the cause of our religion, and are driven
into this dismal wilderness, the only miserable retreat left us in our
native land.'

'Od, sir! he hadna weel begun to speak till the light o' the truth began
to dawn within me like the brek o' the day-sky, an' I grew as red too,
for the devil needna hae envied me my feelings at that time. I couldna
help saying to mysel, 'Whow, whow, Wat Laidlaw! but ye hae made a bonny
job o't this morning!--Here's twa puir creatures, worn out wi' famine
and watching, come to seek a last refuge amang your hags and mosses, and
ye maun fa' to and be pelting and threshing on them like an incarnate
devil as ye are.--Oh, wae's me! wae's me!'--Lord, sir, I thought my
heart wad burst--There was a kind o' yuke came into my een that I could
hardly bruke; but at length the muckle tears wan out wi' a sair faught,
and down they came down ower my beard, dribble for dribble. The men saw
the pliskie that I was in, and there was a kind o' ruefu' benevolence i'
their looks, I never saw ony thing like it.'

'Dinna be wae for us, honest man,' said they; 'we hae learned to
suffer--we hae kend nought else for this mony a lang and bloody year,
an' we look for nought else for the wee while we hae to sojourn in this
weary world--we hae learned to suffer patiently, and to welcome our
sufferings as mercies.'

'Ye've won a gude length, man,' quo' I; 'but they're mercies that I'm
never very fond o'--I wish ye had suffered under ony hand but mine, sin'
it be your lot.'

'Dinna be sorry for us, honest man; there never was an act o' mair
justice than this that ye hae inflicted. Last night there were fifteen
o' us met at evening worship--we hadna tasted meat for days and nights;
to preserve our miserable lives, we stole a sheep, dressed, and ate it;
and wi' this very arm that you hae disabled, did I grip and kill that
sheep. It was a great sin, nae doubt, but the necessity was also
great--I am sae far punished, and I hope the Lord will forgie the rest.'

'If he dinna,' quo' I, 'he's no what I think him.' Then he began a lang
serious harangue about the riches o' free grace, and about the
wickedness o' our nature; and said, that we could do naething o'
oursells _but_ sin. I said it was a hard construction, but I couldna
argy the point ava wi' him--I never was a dab at these lang-winded
stories. Then they cam on about prelacy and heresies, and something they
ca'd the act of abjuration. I couldna follow him out at nae rate; but I
says, I pit nae doubt, callants, but ye're right, for ye hae proven to
a' the warld that ye think sae; and when a man feels conscious that he's
right, I never believe he can be far wrang in sic matters. But that's no
the point in question; let us consider what can be done for ye e'en
now--Poor souls! God kens, my heart's sair for ye; but this land's mine,
an' a' the sheep around ye, an' ye're welcome to half-a-dozen o' the
best o' them in sic a case.'

'Ah! lack-a-day, lack-a-day! If ye be the gudeman o' the Chapelhope,
ye'll rue the day that ever ye saw us. If it's kend that ye countenanced
us in word or deed, ye're a ruined man; for the blood-hounds are near at
hand, and they'll herry ye out and in, but and ben--Lack-a-day!
lack-a-day! in a wee while we may gang and come by the Chapelhope, and
nouther see a lum reek nor hear a cock craw; for Clavers is on the one
hand and Lag on the other, and they're coming nearer and nearer us every
day, and hemming us in sairer and sairer--renounce us and deny us, as ye
wish to thrive.'

'Na, na, lads, let them come--let them come their ways! Gin they should
take a' the ewes and kye on the Chapelhope, I can stock it o'er again. I
dinna gie a bawbee about your leagues, and covenants, and associations,
for I think aye there's a good deal o' faction and dourness in them; but
or I'll desert a fellow-creature that's oppressed, if he's an honest
man, and lippens to me, od, I'll gie them the last drap o' my heart's
bluid.'

"When they heard that, they took me out to the tap of a knowe, and
began to whistle like plovers--nae herd alive could hae kend but they
were plovers--and or ever I wist, ilka hag, and den, and tod-hole round
about, seemed to be fu' o' plovers, for they fell a' to the whistling
an' answering ane another at the same time. I had often been wondering
how they staid sae lang on the heights that year, for I heard them aye
whewing e'en an' morn; but little trowed I they were a' twa-handed
plovers that I heard. In half an hour they had sic a squad gathered
thegither as e'e never glimed on. There ye might hae seen auld
gray-bearded ministers, lairds, weavers, and poor hinds, a' sharing the
same hard fate. They were pale, ragged, and hungry, and several o' them
lame and wounded; and they had athegither sic a haggard severity i'
their demeaner. Lord forgie me, gin I wasna feared to look at them!
There was ane o' them a doctor blade, wha soon set the poor chield's
arm; and he said, that after a' it wasna broken, but only dislockit and
sair brizzed. That doctor was the gabbiest body ever I met wi'; he spake
for them a', and I whiles feared that he sclented a wee. He tried a'
that he could to make me a Cameronian, but I wadna grip; and when I was
coming away to leave him, 'Laidlaw,' quo' he, 'we ken ye to be an
honest, honourable man; here you see a remnant of poor, forlorn,
misrepresented creatures, who have thrown themselves on your mercy; if
ye betray us, it will be the worse for ye both here and hereafter; if
you save and protect us, the prayers of the just win their way to
Heaven, though fiends should be standing by to oppose them--Ay, there's
naething can stop _their_ journey, Laidlaw!--The winds canna blaw them
aside, the clouds canna drown them, and the lights o' Heaven canna burn
them; and your name will stand at that bar where there's nae cruel and
partial judge--What you gie to us, ye gie to your Maker, and he will
repay you seven fold.' Od, the body was like to gar me play the bairn
and greet even out. Weel, I canna mind the half that he said, but he
endit wi' this:--'We have seen our friends all bound, banished, and
destroyed; they have died on the field, on the scaffold, and at the
stake; but the reek o' their blood shall drive the cruel Stuarts frae
the land they have disgraced, and out of it a church of truth and
liberty shall spring. There is still a handfu' remaining in Israel that
have not yet bowed the knee to Baal, nor yet kissed him--That remnant
has fled here to escape the cruelty of man; but a worse fate threatens
us now--we are all of us perishing with famine--For these three days we
have tasted nothing but the green moss, save a few wretched trouts,
eels, and adders.' 'Ethers, man!' quo' I,--'For the love o' God take
care how ye eat the ethers--ye may as weel cut your throats at aince as
eat them. Na, na, lad, that's meat that will never do.' I said nae mair,
but gae just a wave to my dog. 'Reaver,' quo' I, 'yon's away.'--In three
minutes he had ten score o' ewes and wedders at my hand. I grippit twa
o' the best I could wale, and cut aff their heads wi' my ain knife.
'Now, doctor,' quo' I, 'take these and roast them, and part them amang
ye the best way ye can--ye'll find them better than the ethers--Lord,
man, it will never do to eat ethers.'"

After a hearty laugh, in which his guests generally joined, Walter
concluded thus: "That meeting cost me twa or three hunder round
bannocks, and mae gude ewes and wedders than I'll say; but I never
missed them, and I never rued what I did. Folk may say as they like, but
I think aye the prayers out amang the hags and rash-bushes that year did
me nae ill--It is as good to hae a man's blessing as his curse, let him
be what he may."

Walter never went farther with his story straight onward than this; for
it began to involve family concerns, which he did not much like to
recount. He had a number of abstract stories about the Covenanters and
their persecutors; but as I must now proceed with the narrative as I
gathered it from others, these will be interwoven in their due course.




CHAPTER IV.


Walter visited them next day at the time and place appointed, taking
with him a dozen of bannocks and a small cheese. These he was obliged to
steal out of his own pantry, for he durst not by any means trust his
wife and family with the discovery he had made, knowing that he might as
well have confided it with the curate himself, the sworn enemy of his
motley protegees. They gathered around him with protestations of
gratitude and esteem; for the deserted and oppressed generally cling to
the first symptoms of friendship and protection with an ardency that too
often overshoots its aim. Walter naturally felt an honest pride, not so
much in that he had done, as that he intended to do; but before he
produced his repast, he began in a most serious way to question them
relating to some late incidents already mentioned.

They all with one assent declared, and took God to witness, that they
knew nothing at all about the death of the five soldiers; that it was
not perpetrated by them, nor any connected with them; nor could they
comprehend, in the least degree, how it was effected, if not by some
supernatural agency--a judgment sent down from Heaven for their bloody
intent. With regard to the murder of the priest, they were sorry that
they knew so much. It was perpetrated by a few rash men of their number,
but entirely without their concurrent assent, as well as knowledge; that
though his death might have been necessary to the saving of a great
number of valuable lives, they had, nevertheless, unanimously protested
against it; that the perpetrators had retired from their body, they knew
not whither; and that at that very time the Rev. Messrs Alexander
Shiels and James Renwick were engaged in arranging for publication a
general protest against many things alleged against them by their
enemies, and that among others.[A]

There was a candour in this to which Walter's heart assented. He feasted
them with his plentiful and homely cheer--promised to visit them every
day, and so to employ his shepherds that none of them should come into
that quarter to distress them. Walter was as good as his word--He
visited them every day--told them all the news that he could gather of
the troops that beleagured them--of the executions that were weekly and
daily taking place--and of every thing else relating to the state of the
country. He came loaden with food to them daily; and when he found it
impossible to steal his own bread, butter, and cheese, he supplied their
wants from his flock. The numbers of the persecuted increased on his
hands incalculably--The gudewife of Chapelhope's bannocks vanished by
scores, and the unconscionable, insatiable Brownie of Bodsbeck was
blamed for the whole.

Some time previous to this, a young vagrant, of the name of Kennedy,
chanced to be out on these moors shooting grouse, which were extremely
plentiful. He tarried until the twilight, for he had the art of calling
the heath-fowl around him in great numbers, by imitating the cry of the
hen. He took his station for this purpose in one of those moss-hags
formerly described; but he had not well begun to call ere his ears were
saluted by the whistling of so many plovers that he could not hear his
own voice. He was obliged to desist, and lay for some time listening, in
expectation that they would soon cease crying. When lying thus, he heard
distinctly the sound of something like human voices, that spoke in
whispers hard by him; he likewise imagined that he heard the pattering
of feet, which he took for those of horses, and, convinced that it was a
raid of the fairies, he became mortally afraid; he crept closer to the
earth, and in a short time heard a swell of the most mellifluous music
that ever rose on the night. He then got up, and fled with precipitation
away, as he thought, from the place whence the music seemed to arise;
but ere he had proceeded above an hundred paces, he met with one of the
strangest accidents that ever happened to man.

That same night, about, or a little before, the hour of midnight, two of
Laidlaw's men, who happened to be awake, imagined that they heard a
slight noise without; they arose, and looked cautiously out at a small
hole that was in the end of the stable where they slept, and beheld to
their dismay the appearance of four men, who came toward them carrying a
coffin; on their coming close to the corner of the stable, where the two
men stood, the latter heard one of them say distinctly, in a whisper,
"Where shall we lay him?"

"We must leave him in the barn," said another.

"I fear," said a third, "the door of that will be locked;" and they past
on.

The men were petrified; they put on their clothes, but they durst not
move, until, in a short time thereafter, a dreadful bellowing and noise
burst forth about the door of the farm-house. The family was alarmed,
and gathered out to see what was the matter; and behold! there lay poor
Kennedy in a most piteous plight, and, in fact, stark staring mad. He
continued in a high fever all the night, and the next morning; but a
little after noon he became somewhat more calm, and related to them a
most marvellous tale indeed.

He said, that by the time he arose to fly from the sound of the music,
the moor was become extremely dark, and he could not see with any degree
of accuracy where he was running, but that he still continued to hear
the sounds, which, as he thought, came still nigher and nigher behind
him. He was, however, mistaken in this conjecture; for in a short space
he stumbled on a hole in the heath, into which he sunk at once, and fell
into a pit which he described as being at least fifty fathom deep; that
he there found himself immediately beside a multitude of hideous beings,
with green clothes, and blue faces, who sat in a circle round a small
golden lamp, gaping and singing with the most eldrich yells. In one
instant all became dark, and he felt a weight upon his breast that
seemed heavier than a mountain. They then lifted him up, and bore him
away through the air for hundreds of miles, amid regions of utter
darkness; but on his repeating the name of Jesus three times, they
brought him back, and laid him down in an insensible state at the door
of Chapelhope.

The feelings depicted in the features of the auditors were widely
different on the close of this wonderful relation. The beauteous
Katharine appeared full of anxious and woful concern, but no marks of
fear appeared in her lovely face. The servants trembled every limb, and
declared with one voice, that no man about Chapelhope was now sure of
his life for a moment, and that nothing less than double wages should
induce them to remain there another day. The goodwife lifted up her eyes
to Heaven, and cried, "O the vails! the vails!--the vails are poured,
and to pour!"

Walter pretended to laugh at the whole narration; but when he did, it
was with an altered countenance, for he observed, what none of them did,
that Kennedy had indeed been borne through the air by some means or
other; for his shoes were all covered with moss, which, if he had
walked, could not have been there, for the grass would have washed it
off from whatever quarter he had come.

Kennedy remained several days about Chapelhope in a thoughtful, half
delirious frame; but no entreaties could prevail with him at that time
to accompany the men of the place to where he supposed the accident had
happened, nor yet to give them any account where it was situated, for he
averred that he heard a voice say to him in a solemn tone, "If you wish
to live long, never tell what you have seen to-night, nor ever come this
way again." Happy had it been for him had he attended all along to this
injunction. He slipped away from Chapelhope in a few days, and was no
more seen until the time that Copland and his men appeared there. It was
he who came as guide to that soldiers that were slain, and he fell with
them in the strait linn of the South Grain of Chapelhope.

These mysterious and unaccountable incidents by degrees impressed the
minds of the inhabitants with terror that cannot be described; no woman
or boy would go out of doors after sunset, on any account whatever, and
there was scarcely a man who durst venture forth alone after the fall of
evening. If they could have been sure that brownies and fairies had only
power to assume the human shape, they would not have been nearly in such
peril and perplexity; but there was no form of any thing animate or
inanimate, save that of a lamb, that they were sure of; they were of
course waylaid at every turn, and kept in continual agitation. An owl
was a most dangerous and suspicious-looking fellow--a white glede made
them quake, and keep a sharp look-out upon his course in the air--a
hare, with her large intelligent eyes and equivocal way of walking, was
an object of general distrust--and a cat, squalling after dark, was the
devil. Many were the ludicrous scenes that occurred, among which I
cannot help mentioning those which follow, as being particularly
whimsical.

Jasper, son to old John of the Muchrah, was the swiftest runner of his
time; but of all those whose minds were kept in continual agitation on
account of the late inundation of spirits into the country, Jasper was
the chief. He was beset by them morning and evening; and even at high
noon, if the day was dark, he never considered himself as quite safe. He
depended entirely upon his speed in running to avoid their hellish
intercourse; he essayed no other means--and many wonderful escapes he
effected by this species of exertion alone. He was wont to knit
stockings while tending his flock on the mountains; and happening to
drop some yarn one evening, it trailed after him in a long ravelled coil
along the sward. It was a little after the sun had gone down that Jasper
was coming whistling and singing over the shoulder of the Hermon Law,
when, chancing to cast a casual glance behind him, he espied something
in shape of a horrible serpent, with an unequal body, and an enormous
length of tail, coming stealing along the bent after him. His heart
leapt to his mouth, (as he expressed it,) and his hair bristled so that
it thrust the bonnet from his head. He knew that no such monster
inhabited these mountains, and it momently occurred to him that it was
the Brownie of Bodsbeck come to seize him in that most questionable
shape. He betook him to his old means of safety in great haste, never
doubting that he was well qualified to run from any object that crawled
on the ground with its belly; but, after running a considerable way, he
perceived his adversary coming at full stretch along the hill after him.
His speed was redoubled; and, as he noted now and then that his
inveterate pursuer gained no ground on him, his exertion was beyond that
of man. There were two shepherds on an opposite hill who saw Jasper
running without the plaid and the bonnet, and with a swiftness which
they described as quite inconceivable. The cause set conjecture at
defiance; but they remarked, that though he grew more and more spent,
whenever he glanced behind he exerted himself anew, and strained a
little harder. He continued his perseverance to the last, as any man
would do who was running for bare life, until he came to a brook called
the Ker Cleuch, in the crossing of which he fell down exhausted; he
turned on his back to essay a last defence, and, to his joyful
astonishment, perceived that the serpent likewise lay still and did not
move. The truth was then discovered; but many suspected that Jasper
never overcame that heat and that fright as long as he lived.

Jasper, among many encounters with the fairies and brownies, had another
that terminated in a manner not quite so pleasant. The Brownie of
Bodsbeck, or the Queen of the Fairies, (he was not sure which of them
it was,) came to him one night as he was lying alone, and wide awake, as
he conceived, and proffered him many fine things, and wealth and honours
in abundance, if he would go along to a very fine country, which Jasper
conjectured must have been Fairyland. He resisted all these tempting
offers in the most decided manner, until at length the countenance of
his visitant changed from the most placid and bewitching beauty to that
of a fiend. The horrible form grappled with him, laid hold of both his
wrists, and began to drag him off by force; but he struggled with all
the energy of a man in despair, and at length, by a violent exertion, he
disengaged his right hand. The enemy still continuing, however, to haul
him off with the other, he was obliged to have recourse to a desperate
expedient. Although quite naked, he reached his clothes with the one
hand and drew his knife; but, in endeavouring to cut off those fingers
which held his wrist so immovably fast, he fairly severed a piece of
the thumb from his own left hand.

This was the very way that Jasper told the story to his dying day,
denying stoutly that he was in a dream; and, singular as it may appear,
I can vouch for the truth of it. Jasper Hay died at Gattonside at a
right old age, in the year 1739; and they are yet alive who have heard
him tell those stories, and seen him without the thumb of the left hand.

Things went on in this distracted and doubtful manner until the time
when Walter is first introduced. On that day, at the meeting place, he
found no fewer than 130 of the poor wanderers, many of them assembled to
see him for the last time, and take an affectionate leave of him; for
they had previously resolved to part, and scatter themselves again over
the west country, even though certain death awaited them, as they could
not in conscience longer remain to be the utter ruin of one who was so
generous and friendly to them. They saw, that not only would his whole
stock be wasted, but he would himself be subjected to confiscation of
goods, and imprisonment, if to nothing worse. Walter said, the case
seemed hard either way; but he had been thinking, that perhaps, if they
remained quiet and inoffensive in that seclusion, the violence of the
government might in a little relax, and they might then retire to their
respective homes in peace. Walter soon heard with vexation that they
made conscience of _not living in peace_, but of proclaiming aloud to
the world the grievous wrongs and oppression that the church of Christ
in Scotland laboured under. The _doctor chap_, as Walter always called
him, illustrated at great length the sin that would lie to their charge,
should they remain quiet and passive in a time like that, when the
church's all was at stake in these realms. "We are but a remnant," added
he, "a poor despised remnant; but if none stand up for the truth of the
reformed religion, how are ever our liberties, civil or ecclesiastical,
to be obtained? There are many who think with us, and who feel with us,
who yet have not the courage to stand up for the truth; but the time
must ere long come, that the kingdoms of the land will join in
supporting a reformation, for the iniquity of the Amorite is wearing to
the full."

Walter did not much like disputing about these matters; but in this he
felt that his reason acquiesced, and he answered thus: "Ye speak like a
true man, and a clever man, Doctor; and if I had a desperate cause by
the end, and wanted ane to back me in't, the deil a step wad I gang
ayont this moss hag to find him; but, Doctor, there's a time for every
thing. I wadna hae ye to fling away a gude cause, as I wad do a rotten
ewe, that winna haud ony langer. But dinna ye think that a fitter time
may come to mak a push? ye'll maybe sell mae precious lives for nae end,
wi' your declarations; take care that you, and the like o' you, haena
these lives to answer for.--I like nae desperate broostles--od, man,
it's like ane that's just gaun to turn divour, taking on a' the debt he
can."

"Dinna fear, gudeman! dinna fear! There's nae blood shed in sic a cause
that can ever be shed in vain. Na, na! that blood will argue better at
the bar o' Heaven for poor distressed Scotland than all the prayers of
all the living. We hae done muckle, but we'll do mair yet--muckle blood
has been wantonly and diabolically shed, and our's may rin wi' the
rest--we'll no thraw't wantonly and exultingly away; but, when our day
comes, we'll gie it cheerfully--as cheerfully, gudeman, as ever ye paid
your mail to a kind landlord, even though the season had been hard and
stormy. We had aince enough of this warld's wealth, and to spare; but we
hae naething now but our blood, and we'll part wi' that as cheerfully as
the rest. And it will tell some day! and ye may live to see it yet. But
enough, gudeman; we have all resolved, that, whatever the consequence
may be, to live no more on your bounty--therefore, do not urge it--but
give us all your hand--Farewell!--and may God bless you in all your
actings and undertakings!--There is little chance that we shall ever
meet again--We have no reward to give but our blessing and good wishes;
but, whenever a knee here present is bowed at the footstool of grace,
you will be remembered."

Walter could not bear thus to part with them, and to give them up as it
were to certain destruction. He argued as well as he could on the
imprudence of the step they were going to take--of the impossibility of
their finding a retreat so inaccessible in all the bounds of the south
of Scotland, and the prospect that there was of the persecution soon
relaxing. But when he had said all that he could say, a thin spare old
man, with grey dishevelled locks, and looks, Walter said, as stern as
the adders that he had lately been eating, rose up to address him.
There was that in his manner which commanded the most intense attention.

"Dost thou talk of our rulers relaxing?" said he. "Blind and mistaken
man! thou dost not know them. No; they will never relax till their blood
shall be mixed with their sacrifices. That insatiate, gloomy, papistical
tyrant and usurper, the Duke of York, and his commissioner, have issued
laws and regulations more exterminating than ever. But yesterday we
received the woeful intelligence, that, within these eight days, one
hundred and fifty of our brethren have suffered by death or banishment,
and nearly one-half of these have been murdered, even without the sham
formality of trial or impeachment, nor had they intimation of the fate
that awaited them. York hath said in full assembly, 'that neither the
realm nor the mother-church can ever be safe, until the south of
Scotland is again made a hunting forest;' and his commissioner hath
sworn by the living God, 'that never a whig shall again have time or
warning to prepare for Heaven, for that hell is too good for them.' Can
we hope for these men relaxing? No! The detestable and bloody Clavers,
that wizard! that eater of toads! that locust of the infernal pit, hems
us in closer and closer on one side, and that Muscovite beast on the
other! They thirst for our blood; and our death and tortures are to them
matter of great sport and amusement. My name is Mackail! I had two brave
and beautiful sons, and I had but two; one of these had his brains shot
out on the moss of Monyhive without a question, charge, or reply. I
gathered up his brains and shattered skull with these hands, tied them
in my own napkin, and buried him alone, for no one durst assist me. His
murderers stood by and mocked me, cursed me for a dog, and swore if I
howled any more that they would send me after him. My eldest son, my
beloved Hew, was hung like a dog at the Market-cross of Edinburgh. I
conversed with him, I prayed with him in prison, kissed him, and bade
him farewell on the scaffold! My brave, my generous, my beautiful son! I
tell thee, man, thou who preachest up peace and forbearance with
tyrants, should ever the profligate Charles, or his diabolical
brother--should ever the murderer Clavers, or any of his hell-hounds of
the north, dare set foot in Heaven, one look from the calm benignant
face of my martyred son would drive them out howling!"

All this time the old man shed not a tear; his voice was wildly solemn,
but his looks were mixed with madness. He had up his hand to swear, to
pray, or to prophecy, Walter knew not which, but he was restrained by
his associates, and led aside, so that Walter saw no more of him; but he
said he could not get him out of his mind for many a day, for sic
another desperate auld body he had never seen.

These harangues took up much of the time that they had to spare, but ere
they parted Walter persuaded them, probably by his strong homely
reasoning, to remain where they were. He said, since they persisted in
refusing to take more of his flock, there was an extensive common beyond
the height, called Gemsope, which had been a royal forest, where many
gentlemen and wealthy farmers had sheep that fed promiscuously; and
considering their necessitous circumstances, he thought it no evil, and
he advised them to go and take from that glen as many as would serve to
support nature for a time;--that for his part he had many a good wedder
and dinmont there, and was willing to run his risk, which would then
fall equal on a number, and only on such as were rich and could well
bear it. In this plan, after some scruples which were overborne by the
majority, they at length fully and thankfully acquiesced.

That same day, on his way homeward, Walter heard the wonderful relation
of the apparition of his beloved daughter in the Hope at midnight; he
learned that Clavers would be there in a few days, and he had sent away
above 100 men to steal sheep--all these things made him thoughtful and
uneasy after he had reached his home, wet and fatigued.--"It will be a
bloody night in Gemsope this," he said, sighing, not recollecting what
he said or to whom he said it. He could trust his wife with any of his
family concerns, but as long as she continued to be so much influenced
by the curate Clerk, the sworn enemy of his poor persecuted flock, he
durst not give her a hint of their retreat.

Walter became still more and more perplexed from all that he heard from
his wife, as well as from every one else--he found that, in truth, there
was some mysterious thing about his house--the whole family seemed
convinced of it--there were many things seen, heard, and done there that
he could in nowise account for in a rational way, and though he resisted
the general belief for a good while, that the house was haunted,
circumstances at length obliged him to yield to the torrent, and he
believed as faithfully in the Brownie of Bodsbeck as any of them all.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] This curious protest is still extant, and shows the true spirit of
the old Covenanters or Cameronians, as they have since been called,
better than any work remaining. It is called in the title page, "_An
informatory Vindication of a poor, wasted, misrepresented Remnant of the
suffering Anti-popish, Anti-prelatic, Anti-erastian, Anti-sectarian,
true Presbyterian Church of Christ in Scotland_." It is dated at
Leadhills in 1687, and is the conjoint work of Mr James Renwick, and Mr
Alexander Shiels, author of _The Hind let loose_. The following is an
extract from it, p. 107:--

"And in like manner we do hereby disclaim all unwarrantable practices
committed by any few persons reputed to be of us, whereby the Lord hath
been offended, his cause wronged, and we all made to endure the scourge
of tongues; for which things we have desired to make conscience of
mourning before the Lord, both in public and private. As the
unwarrantable manner of killing that curate at the Corsephairn, though
he was a man of death both by the laws of God and man, and the fact not
materially murder; it being gone about contrary to our declaration,
common or competent consent, (the conclusion and deed being known only
to three or four persons) in a rash and not a Christian manner, and also
other offences being committed at the time; which miscarriages have
proven a mean to stop and retard lawful, laudable, and warrantable
proceeding, both as to matter and manner."

These _other offences committed at the time_, unquestionably refer to
the slaughter of the Highland soldiers; about which, there was great
stir and numerous conjectures in the country; although, owing to the
revolution that immediately followed, the perpetrators were never taken,
nor the cause tried in a court of justice, nor indeed was the incident
ever generally known.




CHAPTER V.


The house which Walter occupied was on the very spot where the
farm-house of Chapelhope now stands, but it was twice as long; indeed, a
part of the house that is still standing, or was lately so, is the very
one that was built for Laidlaw when he first entered to that large farm.
There was likewise an outshot from the back of the house, called the Old
Room, which had a door that entered from without, as well as one from
the parlour within. The end of this apartment stood close to the bottom
of the steep bank behind the house, which was then thickly wooded, as
was the whole of the long bank behind, so that, consequently, any one,
with a little caution, might easily have gone out or come in there,
without being seen by any of the family. It contained a bed, in which
any casual vagrant, or itinerant pedlar slept, besides a great deal of
lumber; and as few entered there, it had altogether a damp, mouldy,
dismal appearance. There was likewise a dark closet in one corner of it,
with an old rusty lock, which none of the family had ever seen opened.

The most part of the family soon grew suspicious of this place. Sounds,
either real or imaginary, were heard issuing from it, and it was
carefully shunned by them all. Walter had always, as I said, mocked at
the idea of the Old Room being haunted, until that very night when we
began with him, and where, after many round-abouts, we have now found
him again.

It will be recollected that the conversation between Walter and his
wife, which is narrated in the first chapter of this book, terminated
with a charge from him never more to mention the mysterious story
relating to their daughter and these five men that were destroyed.
After this she retired about some housewife business, and left Walter by
himself to muse on that he had seen and heard. He was sitting musing,
and that deeply, on the strange apparition of his daughter that old John
had seen, when he thought he heard something behind him making a sound
as if it growled inwardly. He looked around and saw that it was his dog
Reaver, who was always an inmate of every place that his master
entered--he was standing in an attitude of rage, but at the same time
there was a mixture of wild terror in his appearance--His eyes, that
gleamed like red burning coals, were pointed directly to the door that
opened from the corner of the parlour into the Old Room--Walter was
astonished, for he well knew his acuteness, but he kept his eyes on him
and said not a word--The dog went forward with a movement scarce
perceptible, until he came close to the door, but on putting his nose
and ear to the bottom of it, he burst out with such a bay and howl as
were truly frightful, and ran about the apartment as if mad, trying to
break through the walls and window boards.--Walter was fairly overcome;
there is nothing frightens a shepherd so much as the seeing of his dog
frightened. The shepherd's dog of the true breed will boldly attack any
animal on earth in defence of his master, or at his command; and it is
no good sign indeed when he appears terrified, for the shepherd well
knows that his dog can discover spirits by the savour of the wind, when
he is all unconscious that any such beings are near.

Walter fled into the kitchen with precipitation--he found all the family
standing in alarm, for they had heard the hideous uproar in the room.

"What's the matter?" said half-a-dozen at once.

"What's the matter!" said Walter, churlishly--"nothing at all is the
matter--tell me who of you were in the Old Room, and what you were
seeking there?"

"No--none of them had been in the Old Room--the whole of the family were
present, nor had one of them been away."

Walter's countenance changed--he fixed his eyes on the ground for the
space of a minute.

"Then I am sure," said he, emphatically, "something worse is there."

A breathless silence ensued; save that some groans and muttered prayers
issued from the lips of the goodwife, who sat in a posture of deep
humility, with her brow leaned on both hands.

"Some of you go and see," added Walter, "what it _is_ that is in the Old
Room."

Every eye in the house turned on another, but no one spoke or offered to
move. At length Katharine, who seemed in great anxiety lest any of them
should have had the courage to go, went lightly up to her father, and
said, "I will go, sir, if you please."

"Do, my dear, and let some of the men go with you."

"No, sir; none of the men shall go with me."

"Well then, Keatie, make haste; light a candle, and I will go with you
myself."

"No--with your leave, father, if I go, I go alone; no one shall go with
me."

"And why, my love, may not I, your father, accompany you?"

"Because, should you go with me into the Old Room just now, perhaps you
might never be yourself again."

Here the goodwife uttered a smothered scream, and muttered some
inarticulate ejaculations, appearing so much affected, that her
daughter, dreading she would fall into a fit, flew to support her; but
on this she grew ten times worse, screaming aloud, "Avoid thee, Satan!
avoid thee, Satan! avoid thee, imp of darkness and despair! avoid thee!
avoid thee!" And she laid about her violently with both hands. The
servants, taking it for granted that she was bewitched, or possessed,
fled aloof; but Walter, who knew better how matters stood with her mind
than they, ran across the floor to her in such haste and agitation, that
they supposed he was going to give her _strength of arm_, (his great
expedient when hardly controuled,) but in place of that, he lifted her
gently in his arms, and carried her to her bed, in the further end of
the house.

He then tried to sooth her by every means in his power; but she
continued in violent agitation, sighing, weeping, and praying
alternately, until she wrought herself into a high nervous fever.
Walter, growing alarmed for her reason, which seemed verging to a
dangerous precipice, kept close by her bed-side. A little before
midnight she grew calm; and he, thinking she had fallen asleep, left her
for a short time. Unfortunately, her daughter, drawn toward her by
filial regard and affection, softly then entered the room. Maron Linton
was not so sound asleep as was supposed; she instantly beheld the
approach of that now dreaded sorceress, and sitting up in her bed, she
screamed as loud as she was able. Katharine, moved by a natural impulse,
hasted forward to the couch to calm her parent; but the frenzied matron
sprung from her bed, threw up the window, and endeavoured to escape;
Katharine flew after her, and seized her by the waist. When Maron found
that she was fairly in her grasp at such an hour, and no help at hand,
she deemed all over with her, both body and soul; which certainly was a
case extreme enough. She hung by the sash of the window, struggled, and
yelled out, "Murder! murder! murder!--O Lord! O Lord!--save! save! save!
save!--Murder! murder!" &c. At length Walter rushed in and seized her,
ordering his weeping daughter instantly to bed.

Maron thanked Heaven for this wonderful and timely deliverance, and
persuaded now that Providence had a special and peculiar charge over
her, she became more calm than she had been since the first alarm; but
it was a dreadful certainty that she now possessed, that unearthly
beings inhabited the mansion along with her, and that her daughter was
one of the number, or in conjunction with them. She spent the night in
prayer, and so fervent was she in her devotions, that she seemed at
length to rest in the hope of their final accomplishment. She did not
fail, however, to hint to Walter that something decisive ought to be
done to their daughter. She did not actually say that she should be
burnt alive at a stake, but she spake of the trial by fire--or that it
might be better to throw her into the lake, to make the experiment
whether she would drown or not; for she well expected, in her own mind,
that when the creature found itself in such circumstances, it would fly
off with an eldrich laugh and some unintelligible saying to its own
clime; but she was at length persuaded by her husband to intrust the
whole matter to her reverend monitor, both as to the driving away the
herd of Brownies, and the exorcism of her daughter.

Never was man in such a predicament as Walter now found himself with
regard to his family. Katharine had never been a favourite with her
mother, who doated on her boys to the detriment of the girl, but to him
she was all in all. Her demeanour of late completely puzzled him--The
words that she had said to him the preceding evening had no appearance
of jocularity; besides, seriousness and truth formed her natural
character, and she had of late become more reserved and thoughtful than
she had ever been before.

The bed that she slept in faced into the parlour before mentioned;
that which Walter and his spouse occupied entered from another
apartment--their backs, however, were only separated by a thin wooden
partition. Walter kept awake all that night, thoughtful, and listening
to every sound. Every thing remained quiet till about the second crowing
of the cock; he then heard something that scratched like a rat, but
more regularly, and in more distinct time. After the noise had been
repeated three times at considerable intervals, he thought he heard his
daughter rising from her bed with extraordinary softness and caution--He
laid his ear to a seam, and distinctly heard the sound of words uttered
in a whisper, but of their import he could make nothing. He then heard
his daughter return to her bed with the same caution that she left it,
utter some sighs, and fall sound asleep.

After serious deliberation, Walter thought his best expedient was to
remove his daughter from home for some time; and next morning he
proposed to her to go and spend a week or two with her maternal uncle,
Thomas Linton, farmer at Gilmanscleuch. To this she objected on several
pretences; but at length, when urged to it, positively refused to leave
her father's house at that time. He never in his life could say a harsh
word to her, but that day he appeared chagrined, and bade her, with
some asperity, keep away from her mother's presence, as her malady,
which was a nervous complaint, required the utmost quietness. This she
promised with her accustomed cheerfulness, and they parted. During the
day she was absent for several hours, none knowing whither she went, or
by what way she returned.

On the same day, the servants, who had spent a sleepless night, packed
up bag and baggage, and went off in a body, all save one elderly woman,
who had lately come to the house, and was a stranger to them all. Her
name, she said, was Agnes Alexander, but she was better known by the
familiar one of Nanny Elshinder; her former history and connections were
doubtful, but she was of a cheerful complaisant temper, and always
performed what she was ordered to do without any remarks. Walter had
hired her at Moffat, in the fair called _The Third Friday_; and told
Maron when he came home, that "he had hired a wastlin auldish quean,
wha, he believed, was a wee crackit i'the head, but, poor thing, she
wasna like to get a place, and was sic a good soul he coudna think to
leave her destitute; and whanever he begoud to parley wi' her, od, she
brought him to the neb o' the mire-snipe directly." Saving this good
woman, all the house servants, man, woman, and boy, deserted their
service, and neither promises nor threats could induce them to stay
another night about the town. They said, "they might as weel bide i'
hell; they wad gang afore Gibby Moray, the king's shirra, whanever he
likit about it; or, gin he buid rather hae brawer burlymen, they wad
meet him face to face in the Parliment Close."

Walter was now obliged to bring Jasper, his young shepherd, down from
the Muchrah, to assist him in the labour of the farm--the most unfit man
in the world for a haunted house. He knew that the Old Room was
frequented by his old adversary, the Brownie of Bodsbeck. He likewise
knew that his young mistress was a witch, or something worse, for the
late servants had told him, so that he had now a dangerous part to act.
Nevertheless, he came determined to take the bull by the horns; for as
he and his father had stocks of sheep upon the farm, they could not
leave their master, and he was never wont to disobey him. He had one
sole dependance--his swiftness of foot--that had never yet failed him in
eschewing them, save in the solitary instance of the serpent.

On the first day of his noviceship as a labourer, he and his master were
putting some ropes on the dwelling-house to keep on the thatch. Jasper
wanting something whereon to stand, for that purpose, and being within a
few yards of the door of the Old Room, and knowing that the tubs stood
there, thoughtlessly dashed into it to bring out one to stand on; but he
had not taken two steps within the door till he beheld a human face,
and nothing but a face and a head, looking deliberately at him. One
would have thought that such a man, seeing such a sight, would have
cried out, fled to his master on the other side of the house, or into
the kitchen to old Nanny. Jasper did none of them all. He turned round
with such velocity that he fell--hasted out at the door on all fours,
and took to the Piper-hill like a wild deer, praying fervently all the
way. His master saw him from the ladder where he stood, and called aloud
after him, but he deigned not to heed or look behind him--the head
without the body, and that at an ordinary distance from the ground, was
alone impressed on his mind, and refused a share to any other
consideration. He came not back to the Chapelhope that night.

Katharine, the young and comely friend of the Brownie, having discovered
that Jasper had been introduced to her familiar, and knowing his truth
and simplicity of heart, earnestly desired to sound him on the subject.
She knew he would return to assist her father and brothers with the farm
labour, in their present strait, by a certain hour next morning, and she
waited on him by the way. He came accordingly; but he knew her and her
connections better than she imagined. He tried to avoid her, first by
going down into the meadow, then by climbing the hill; but seeing that
she waylaid him both ways, and suspecting her intentions to be of the
very worst nature, he betook him to his old expedient--fled with
precipitation, and returned to the Muchrah.

Katharine could by no means comprehend this, and was particularly
concerned about it at this time, as she had something she wished to
reveal to him. Walter appeared gloomy and discontented all that day. The
corn was ripe, but not a sheaf of it cut down;--the hay was still
standing on the meadow, the lint was to pull, the potatoes to raise,
the tar to bring home, and the sheep to smear; and there was no one left
to do all this but he and his two boys. The gudewife, who used to bustle
about and do much household work, was confined to her room. His
daughter's character, her demeanour, and even her humanity, were become
somewhat doubtful. Walter was truly in what he termed _a pickled
priminary_.

Katharine, being still debarred all access to her mother, began to dread
that she would be obliged to leave her father's house; and, in case of a
last extremity, she bethought her of sounding the dispositions of old
Nanny. She was a character not easily to be comprehended. She spoke much
to herself, but little to any other person--worked so hard that she
seldom looked up, and all the while sung scraps of old songs and
ballads, the import of which it was impossible to understand; but she
often chaunted these with a pathos that seemed to flow from the heart,
and that never failed to affect the hearer. She wore a russet worsted
gown, clouted shoes, and a quoif, or mutch, upon her head, that was
crimped and plaited so close around her face that very little of the
latter was visible. In this guise was Nanny, toiling hard and singing
her mournful ditty, when Katharine came in and placed herself on a seat
by her side.

"Nanny, this seems to be more than ordinary a busy day with you; pray,
what is all this baking and boiling for?"

"Dear bairn, dear bairn, what do I ken--the like o' me maun do as we're
bidden--guests are coming, my bairn--O, ay--there's mony a braw an'
bonny lad coming this way--mony a ane that will gaur a young thing's
e'en stand i' back water--

    "They are coming! they are coming!
      Alak! an' wae's me!
    Though the sword be in the hand,
      Yet the tear's in the e'e.

    Is there blood in the moorlands
      Where the wild burnies rin?
    Or what gars the water
      Wind reid down the lin?

    O billy, dear billy,
      Your boding let be,
    For it's nought but the reid lift
      That dazzles your e'e."

"Prithee go on, Nanny; let me hear what it was that reddened the water?"

"Dear bairn, wha kens; some auld thing an' out o' date; but yet it is
sae like the days that we hae seen, ane wad think the poeter that made
it had the second sight. Mony a water as weel as the Clyde has run reid
wi' blude, an' that no sae lang sin' syne!--ay, an' the wild burnies
too! I hae seen them mysel leave a reid strip on the sand an' the grey
stanes--but the hoody craw durstna pick there!--Dear bairn, has the
Chapelhope burn itsel never had the hue?"

Here Katharine's glance and Nanny's met each other, but were as quickly
withdrawn, for they dreaded one another's converse; but they were soon
relieved from that dilemma by Nanny's melancholy chime--

    "In yon green houm there sat a knight,--
      An' the book lay open on his knee,
    An' he laid his hand on his rusty sword.
      An' turned to Heaven his watery e'e.

    But in yon houm there is a kirk,
      An' in that kirk there is a pew,
    An' in that pew there sat a king,
      Wha signed the deed we maun ever rue.

    He wasna king o' fair Scotland,
      Though king o' Scotland he should hae been,--
    And he lookit north to the land he loved,
      But aye the green leaves fell atween.

    The green leaves fell, an' the river swell'd.
      An' the brigg was guardit to the key;
    O, ever alak! said Hamilton
      That sic a day I should ever see!

    As ever ye saw the rain down fa',
      Or yet the arrow gae from the bow--

"No, that's not it--my memory is gane wi' my last warldly hope--Hech!
dear bairn, but it is a sad warld to live in, without hope or love for
ony that's in't--I had aye some hope till now! but sic a dream as I had
last night!--I saw him aince again--Yes, I saw him bodily, or may I
never steer aff this bit."--Here Nanny sobbed hard, and drew her arms
across her eyes.--"Come, come," continued she, "gie me a bit sang, dear
bairn, an' let it be an auld thing--they do ane's heart gude thae bits
o' auld sangs."

"Rather tell me, Nanny--for we live in ignorance in this wild
place--what you think of all that blude that has been shed in our
country since the killing-time began? Do you think it has been lawfully
and rightfully shed?"

"Wha doubts it, dear bairn?--Wha doubts that?--But it will soon be ower
now--the traitors will soon be a' strappit and strung--ay, ay--the last
o' them will soon be hackit and hewed, an' his bloody head stannin ower
the Wast Port--an' there will be braw days than--we'll be a' right
than."

Katharine sat silent and thoughtful, eyeing old Nanny with fixed
attention; but the muscles of her contracted face and wild unstable eye
were unintelligible. She therefore, with a desponding mien, went out,
and left the crazy dame to discourse and sing to herself. Nanny ceased
her baking, stood upright, and listened to the maid's departing steps,
till judging her out of hearing; she then sung out, in what is now
termed the true _bravura_ style,

    "Then shall the black gown flap
      O'er desk and true man;
    Then shall the horny cap
      Shine like the new moon;
    An' the kist fu' o' whistles
      That maks sic a cleary,
    Lool away, bool away,
      Till we grow weary.
            Till we grow weary, &c.

    Charlie, the cypher-man,
      Drink till ye stew dame;
    Jamie, the wafer-man,
      Eat till ye spue them;
    Lauderdale lick-my-fud,
      Binny and Geordie,
    Leish away, link away.
      Hell is afore ye.
            Hell is afore ye, &c.

    Græme will gang ower the brink,
      Down wi' a flaughter;
    Lagg an' Drumlandrick
      Will soon follow after;
    Johnston and Lithgow,
      Bruce and Macleary,
    Scowder their harigalds,
      Deils, wi' a bleery.
            Till ye grow weary," &c.

In the mean time, Katharine, on hearing the loud notes of the song, had
returned within the door to listen, and heard the most part of the lines
and names distinctly. She had heard it once before, and the singer
reported it to be a new song, and the composition of a young man who had
afterwards been executed in the Grass-Market. How Nanny came to sing
such a song, with so much seeming zest, after the violent prelatic
principles which she had so lately avowed, the maid could not well
comprehend, and she began to suspect that there was more in Nanny's mind
than had yet been made manifest. Struck with this thought, and
ruminating upon it, she continued standing in the same position, and
heard Nanny sometimes crooning, and at other times talking rapidly and
fervently to herself. After much incoherent matter, lines of psalms, &c.
Katharine heard with astonishment the following questions and answers,
in which two distinct voices were imitated:--

"Were you at the meeting of the traitors at Lanark on the 12th of
January?"

"I never was amang traitors that I was certain of till this day--Let
them take that! bloody fruesome beasts."

"Were you at Lanark on that day?"

"If you had been there you would have seen."

"D--n the old b--! Burn her with matches--squeeze her with pincers as
long as there's a whole piece of her together--then throw her into
prison, and let her lie till she rot--the old wrinkled hag of h--! Good
woman, I pity you; you shall yet go free if you will tell us where you
last saw Hamilton and your own goodman."

"Ye sall hing me up by the tongue first, and cut me a' in collops while
I'm hingin."

"Burn her in the cheek, cut baith her lugs out, and let her gae to h--
her own way."

After this strange soliloquy, the speaker sobbed aloud, spoke in a
suppressed voice for some time, and then began a strain so sweet and
melancholy, that it thrilled the hearer, and made her tremble where she
stood. The tune was something like the Broom of Cowdenknows, the
sweetest and most plaintive of the ancient Scottish airs; but it was
sung so slow, as to bear with it a kind of solemnity.

    "The kye are rowting in the lone,
      The ewes bleat on the brae,
    O, what can ail my auld gudeman,
      He bides sae lang away!

    An' aye the Robin sang by the wud,
      An' his note had a waesome fa';
    An' the corbie croupit in the clud,
      But he durstna light ava;

    Till out cam the wee grey moudiwort
      Frae neath the hollow stane,
    An' it howkit a grave for the auld grey head,
      For the head lay a' its lane!

    But I will seek out the Robin's nest,
      An' the nest of the ouzel shy,
    For the siller hair that is beddit there
      Maun wave aboon the sky."

The sentiments of old Nanny appeared now to her young mistress to be
more doubtful than ever. Fain would she have interpreted them to be such
as she wished, but the path which that young female was now obliged to
tread required a circumspection beyond her experience and discernment
to preserve, while danger and death awaited the slightest deviation.




CHAPTER VI.


Next morning Clavers, with fifty dragoons, arrived at Chapelhope, where
they alighted on the green; and putting their horses to forage, he and
Sir Thomas Livingston, Captain Bruce, and Mr Adam Copland, before
mentioned, a gentleman of Clavers' own troop, went straight into the
kitchen. Walter was absent at the hill. The goodwife was sitting lonely
in the east room, brooding over her trials and woes in this life, and
devising means to get rid of her daughter, and with her of all the
devouring spirits that haunted Chapelhope; consequently the first and
only person whom the gentlemen found in the kitchen was old Nanny.
Clavers, who entered first, kept a shy and sullen distance, for he never
was familiar with any one; but Bruce, who was a jocular Irish
gentleman, and well versed in harassing and inveigling the ignorant
country people to their destruction, made two low bows (almost to the
ground) to the astonished dame, and accosted her as follows: "How are
you to-day, mistress?--I hope you are very well?"

"Thank ye kindly, sir," said Nanny, curtseying in return; "deed I'm no
sae weel as I hae been; I hae e'en seen better days; but I keep aye the
heart aboon, although the achings and the stitches hae been sair on me
the year."

"Lack-a-day! I am so very sorry for that!--Where do they seize you?
about the heart, I suppose?--Oh, dear soul! to be sure you do not know
how sorry I am for your case--it must be so terribly bad! You should
have the goodness to consult your physician, and get blood let."

"Dear bairn, I hae nae blude to spare--an' as for doctors, I haena
muckle to lippen to them. To be sure, they are whiles the means, under
Providence"----

"Oho!" said he, putting his finger to his nose, and turning to his
associates with a wry face,--"Oho! the means under Providence!--a d--d
whig, by ----. Tell me, my dear and beautiful Mistress Stitchaback, do
you really believe in that blessed thing, Providence?"

"Do I believe in Providence!--Did ever ony body hear sic a question as
that? Gae away, ye muckle gouk--d'ye think to make a fool of a puir
body?"

So saying, she gave him a hearty slap on the cheek; at which his
companions laughing, Bruce became somewhat nettled, and, drawing out his
sword, he pointed at the recent stains of blood upon it. "Be so good as
to look here, my good lady," said he, "and take very good note of all
that I say, and more; for harkee, you must either renounce Providence,
and all that I bid you renounce,--and you must, beside that, answer all
the questions that I shall ever be after asking,--or, do you see, I am a
great doctor--this is my very elegant lance--and I'll draw the blood
that shall soon ease you of all your stitches and pains."

"I dinna like your fleem ava, man--'tis rather ower grit for an auld
body's veins. But ye're surely some silly skemp of a fallow, to draw out
your sword on a puir auld woman. Dinna think, howanabee, that I care for
outher you or it. I'll let ye see how little I mind ye; for weel I ken
your comrades wadna let ye fash me, e'en though ye were sae silly as to
offer. Na, na; d'ye ever think that little bonny demure-looking lad
there wad suffer ye to hurt a woman?--I wat wad he no! He has mair
discreation in his little finger than you hae i' your hale bouk.--Now
try me, master doctor--I'll nouther renounce ae thing that ye bid me,
nor answer ae question that ye speer at me."

"In the first place, then, my good hearty dame, do you acknowledge or
renounce the Covenant?"

"Aha! he's wise wha wats that, an' as daft that speers."

"Ay, or no, in a moment--No juggling with me, old Mrs Skinflint."

"I'll tell ye what ye do, master--if ony body speer at ye, gin auld
Nanny i' the Chapelhope renounces the Covenant, shake your head an' say
ye dinna ken."

"And pray, my very beautiful girl, what do you keep this old tattered
book for?"

"For a fancy to gar fools speer, an' ye're the first--Come on now, sir,
wi' your catechis--Wally-dye man! gin ye be nae better a fighter than
ye're an examiner, ye may gie up the craft."

Bruce here bit his lip, and looked so stern that Nanny, with a
hysterical laugh, ran away from him, and took shelter behind Clavers.

"You are a d--d fool, Bruce," said he, "and constantly blundering.--Our
business here, mistress, is to discover, if possible, who were the
murderers of an honest curate, and some of our own soldiers that were
slain in this neighbourhood while discharging their duty; if you can
give us any information on that subject, you shall be well rewarded."

"Ye'll hear about the curate, sir--ye'll hear about him--he was found
out to be a warlock, and shot dead.--But ah, dear bairn! nane alive can
gie you information about the soldiers!--It was nae human hand did that
deed, and there was nae e'e out o' heaven saw it done--There wasna a man
that day in a' the Hope up an' down--that deed will never be fund out,
unless a spirit rise frae the dead an' tell o't--Muckle fear, an' muckle
grief it has been the cause o' here!--But the men war a' decently
buried; what mair could be done?"

"Do you say that my men were all decently buried?"

"Ay, troth, I wat weel, worthy sir, and wi' the burial-service too.--My
master and mistress are strong king's folk."

"So you are not the mistress of this house?"

"A bonny like mistress I wad be, forsooth--Na, na, my mistress is sittin
be hersel ben the house there." With that, Nanny fell a working and
singing full loud--

    "Little wats she wha's coming,
    Little wats she wha's coming,
    Strath and Correy's ta'en the bent,
    An' Ferriden an' a's coming;
    Knock and Craigen Sha's coming,
    Keppoch an' Macraw's coming,
    Clan-Mackinnon's ower the Kyle,
    An' Donald Gun an' a's coming."

Anxious now to explore the rest of the house, they left Nanny singing
her song, and entered the little parlour hastily, where, finding no one,
and dreading that some escape might be effected, Clavers and Livingston
burst into the Old Room, and Bruce and Copland into the other. In the
Old Room they found the beautiful witch Katharine, with the train of her
snow-white joup drawn over her head, who looked as if taken in some evil
act by surprise, and greatly confounded when she saw two gentlemen
enter her sanctuary in splendid uniforms. As they approached, she made a
slight curtsey, to which they deigned no return; but going straight up
to her, Clavers seized her by both wrists. "And is it, indeed, true,"
said he, "my beautiful shepherdess, that we have caught you at your
prayers so early this morning?"

"And what if you have, sir?" returned she.

"Why, nothing at all, save that I earnestly desire, and long exceedingly
to join with you in your devotional exercises," laying hold of her in
the rudest manner.

Katharine screamed so loud that in an instant old Nanny was at their
side, with revenge gleaming from her half-shaded eyes, and heaving over
her shoulder a large green-kale gully, with which she would doubtless
have silenced the renowned Dundee for ever, had not Livingston sprung
forward with the utmost celerity, and caught her arm just as the stroke
was descending. But Nanny did not spare her voice; she lifted it up
with shouts on high, and never suffered one yell to lose hearing of
another.

Walter, having just then returned from the hill, and hearing the hideous
uproar in the Old Room, rushed into it forthwith to see what was the
matter. Katharine was just sinking, when her father entered, within the
grasp of the gentle and virtuous Clavers. The backs of both the knights
were towards Walter as he came in, and they were so engaged amid bustle
and din that neither of them perceived him, until he was close at their
backs. He was at least a foot taller than any of them, and nearly as
wide round the chest as them both. In one moment his immense fingers
grasped both their slender necks, almost meeting behind each of their
windpipes. They were rendered powerless at once--they attempted no more
struggling with the women, for so completely had Walter's gripes
unnerved them, that they could scarcely lift their arms from their
sides; neither could they articulate a word, or utter any other sound
than a kind of choaked gasping for breath. Walter wheeled them about to
the light, and looked alternately at each of them, without quitting or
even slackening his hold.

"Callants, wha ir ye ava?--or what's the meanin' o' a' this unmencefu'
rampaging?"

Sir Thomas gave his name in a hoarse and broken voice; but Clavers,
whose nape Walter's right hand embraced, and whose rudeness to his
daughter had set his mountain-blood a-boiling, could not answer a word.
Walter, slackening his hold somewhat, waited for an answer, but none
coming--

"Wha ir ye, I say, ye bit useless weazel-blawn like urf that ye're?"

The haughty and insolent Clavers was stung with rage; but seeing no
immediate redress was to be had, he endeavoured to pronounce his dreaded
name, but it was in a whisper scarcely audible, and stuck in his
throat--"Jo--o--o Graham," said he.

"Jock Graham do they ca' ye?--Ye're but an unmannerly whalp, man. And
ye're baith king's officers too!--Weel, I'll tell ye what it is, my
denty clever callants; if it warna for the blood that's i' your master's
veins, I wad nite your twa bits o' pows thegither."

He then threw them from him; the one the one way, and the other the
other, and lifting his huge oak staff, he strode out at the door,
saying, as he left them,--"Hech! are free men to be guidit this
gate--I'll step down to the green to your commander, an' tell him what
kind o' chaps he keeps about him to send into fock's houses.--Dirty
unmensefu' things!"

Clavers soon recovering his breath, and being ready to burst with rage
and indignation, fell a cursing and fuming most violently; but Sir T.
Livingston could scarcely refrain from breaking out into a convulsion
of laughter. Clavers had already determined upon ample revenge, for the
violation of all the tender ties of nature was his delight, and wherever
there was wealth to be obtained, or a private pique to be revenged,
there never was wanting sufficient pretext in those days for cutting off
individuals, or whole families, as it suited. On the very day previous
to that, the Earl of Traquair had complained, in company with Clavers
and his officers, of a tenant of his, in a place called Bald, who would
neither cultivate his farm nor give it up. Captain Bruce asked if he
prayed in his family? The Earl answered jocularly, that he believed he
did nothing else. Bruce said that was enough; and the matter passed over
without any farther notice. But next morning, Bruce went out with four
dragoons, and shot the farmer as he was going out to his work. Instances
of this kind are numerous, if either history or tradition can be in
aught believed; but in all the annals of that age, there is scarcely a
single instance recorded of any redress having been granted to the
harassed country people for injuries received. At this time, the word of
Argyle's rising had already spread, and Clavers actually traversed the
country more like an exterminating angel, than a commander of a
civilized army.

Such were the men with whom Walter had to do; and the worst thing of
all, he was not aware of it. He had heard of such things, but he did not
believe them; for he loved his king and country, and there was nothing
that vexed him more than hearing of aught to their disparagement; but
unluckily his notions of freedom and justice were far above what the
subjects of that reign could count upon.

When Clavers and Livingstone entered the Old Room, it will be remembered
that Bruce and Copland penetrated into the other. There they found the
goodwife of Chapelhope, neatly dressed in her old-fashioned style, and
reading on her Bible, an exercise in which she gloried, and of which she
was very proud.

Bruce instantly desired her "to lay that very comely and precious book
on the hottest place of all the beautiful fire, that was burning so
pleasantly with long crackling peat; and that then he would converse
with her about things that were, to be sure, of far greater and mightier
importance."

"Hout, dear sir, ye ken that's no consistent wi' natural reason--Can any
thing be o' greater importance than the tidings o' grace an' salvation,
an' the joys o' heaven?"

"Oho!" cried Bruce, and straddled around the room with his face turned
to the joists.--"My dear Copland, did you ever hear such a thing in all
the days that ever you have to live? Upon my soul, the old woman is
talking of grace, and salvation, and the joys of heaven too, by Saint
G--! My dearest honey and darling, will you be so kind as stand up upon
the soles of your feet, and let me see what kind of a figure you will be
in heaven. Now, by the cross of Saint Patrick, I would take a journey
there to see you go swimming through Heaven in that same form, with
your long waist, and plaitted quoif, and that same charming face of
yours. Och! och! me! what a vile she whig we have got in this here
corner!--Copland, my dear soul, I foresee that all the ewes and kine of
Chapelhope will soon be rouped at the cross of Selkirk, and then what
blessed lawings we shall have! Now my dear mistress Grace, you must be
after renouncing the joys of heaven immediately; for upon my honour, the
very sight of your face would spoil the joys of any place whatever, and
the first thing you must do is to lay that delightful old book with the
beautiful margin along the side of it, on the coals; but before you do
that we shall sing to his praise and glory from the 7th verse of the
149th psalm."

He then laid aside his helmet and sung the psalm, giving out each line
with a whine that was truly ludicrous, after which he put the Bible into
the goodwife's hand, and desired her, in a serious tone, instantly to
lay it on the fire. The captain's speech to his companions about the
ewes and kine of Chapelhope was not altogether lost on the conscience of
Maron Linton. It was not, as she afterwards said, like water spilt upon
the ground, which cannot be gathered up again. "Why, dear sir," said
she, "ye ken, after a', that the beuk's naething but paper an' ink, an'
three shillings an' aughtpence will buy as gude a ane frae Geordy
Dabson, the morn, an' if there be ony sin in't, it will lye at your
door, an' no at mine. I'll ne'er haigel wi' my king's officer about
three and aughtpence."

So saying, Maron laid the Bible on the fire, which soon consumed it to
ashes.

"Now, may the devil take me," said Bruce, "if I do not believe that you
are a true woman after all, and if so, my purse is lighter by one half
than it was; but, my dear honey, you have the very individual and
genuine seeds of whiggism in your constitution--You have, I will swear,
been at many a harmless and innocent conventicle."

"Ye ken little about me, sir.--Gude forbid that ever I countenanced sic
traitors to the kirk and state!"

"Amen! say I; but I prophecy and say unto thee, that the first
field-meeting into which thou goest in the beauty of holiness, thou
shalt be established for ever with thy one foot in Dan and the other in
Beersheba, and shalt return to thy respective place of abode as rank a
whig as ever swung in the Grass-Market."

A long dialogue next ensued, in which the murder of the priest, Mass
John Binram, was discussed at full length, and by which Bruce and
Copland discerned, that superstitious as Maron was, she told them what
she deemed to be the truth, though in a strange round-about way. Just as
they were beginning to talk over the mysterious murder of the soldiers,
Claverhouse and Sir Thomas joined them, and Bruce, turning round to
them, said, "My lord, this very honest woman assures me, that she
believes the two principal murderers of the curate are lying concealed
in a linn not far hence, and there seems to be little doubt but that
they must likewise have been concerned in the murder of our soldiers."

Clavers, the horrors of whose execrations are yet fresh in the memory of
our peasants, burst out as follows, to the astonishment of Bruce, who
was not aware of his chagrin, or of aught having befallen him.

"May the devil confound and d--n them to hell!--May he make a brander of
their ribs to roast their souls on!"

Maron Linton, hearing herself called a good woman, and finding that she
was approven of, could not refrain from interfering here.

"Dear sir, my lord, ye sudna swear that gate, for it's unco ill-faur'd
ye ken--an' at ony rate, the deil canna damn naebody--if ye will swear,
swear sense."

The rage of the general, and the simplicity of the goodwife, was such an
amusing contrast, that the three attendants laughed aloud. Clavers
turned his deep grey eye upon them, which more than the eye of any human
being resembled that of a serpent--offence gleamed in it.

"Gentlemen," said he, "do you consider where you are, and what you are
about? Sacre! am I always to be trysted with boys and fools?"

He then began and examined the goodwife with much feigned deference and
civility, which so pleased her that she told him every thing with great
readiness. She was just beginning to relate the terrible, but
unfortunate story of the Brownie of Bodsbeck, and his train of officious
spirits; of the meat which they devoured, and in all probability would
have ended the relation with the woeful connection between the Brownie
and her daughter, and the part that she had taken in the murder of the
soldiers, when Walter entered the room with a discomposed mien, and gave
a new turn to the conversation. But that eventful scene must be left to
the next chapter.




CHAPTER VIII.


Walter, on coming to the troopers and asking for their leader, soon
discovered how roughly he had treated Clavers; and it being so much the
reverse of the reception he meant to have given him, he was particularly
vexed about it. Still he was conscious that he had done nothing that was
wrong, nor any thing that it did not behove a parent and a master of a
family to have done in the same circumstances; therefore there was
nothing farther from his intention than offering any apology. He entered
his own room, as he supposed he had a good right to do, bluntly enough.
He indeed touched the rim of his bonnet as he came in; but, seeing all
the officers covered, he stalked into the midst of them with that
immense circle of blue woollen on his head, which moved over their
helmets like a black cloud as he advanced. Bruce, who was well used to
insult the peasantry with impunity, seeing Walter striding majestically
by his general in this guise, with his wonted forwardness and jocularity
lifted up his sword, sheathed as it was, and with the point of it kicked
off Walter's bonnet. The latter caught it again as it fell, and with his
fist, he made Bruce's helmet ring against the wall; then again fitting
on his bonnet, he gave him such an indignant and reproving look, that
Bruce, having no encouragement from the eye of Clavers, resented it no
farther than by saying good-humouredly, "'Pon my body and shoul, but the
carle keeps his good-looking head high enough."

"Copland," said Clavers, "desire Serjeant Daniel Roy Macpherson, with
eleven troopers, to attend." They were instantly at the door. "Seize
and pinion that haughty rebel, together with all his family," said he,
"and then go and search every corner, chest, and closet in the house;
for it is apparent that this is the nest and rendezvous of the murdering
fanatics who infest this country. Let the rest of the soldiers guard the
premises, that none escape to the mountains with tidings of our arrival.
This good dame we will first examine privately, and then dispose of her
as shall seem most meet."

The command was promptly obeyed. Walter and all his family were taken
into custody, pinioned, and a guard set on them; the house was
ransacked; and in the meantime the general and his three associates
continued the examination of the goodwife. Clavers observed that, on the
entrance of Walter before, she seemed to be laid under some restraint,
stopped short in her narration, and said, "But there's the gudeman;
he'll tell ye it wi' mair preceesion nor me;" and he had no doubt, if
she were left to herself, of worming as much out of her as would
condemn her husband, or at least furnish a pretext sufficient for the
forfeiture of his wealth. Clavers had caused to be sold, by public roup,
the whole stock on the farm of Phillhope, which belonged to Walter's
brother-in-law, merely because it was proven that the farmer's wife had
once been at a conventicle.

In the present instance, however, Clavers was mistaken, and fairly
overshot his mark; for poor Maron Linton was so overwhelmed with
astonishment when she saw her husband and family taken prisoners and
bound, that her speech lost all manner of coherence. She sobbed
aloud--complained one while, entreated another; and then muttered over
some ill-sorted phrases from the Scripture. When Clavers pressed his
questions, she answered him, weeping, "O dear sir, my lord, ye ken I
canna do naething, nor think naething, nor answer naething, unless ye
let Watie loose again; I find as I war naebody, nor nae soul, nor
naething ava wantin' him, but just like a vacation or a shadow. O my
lord, set my twa bits o' callants an' my puir auld man loose again, and
I'll say ony thing that ever ye like."

Threats and proffers proved alike in vain. Maron's mind, which
never was strong, had been of late so much unhinged by the terrors of
superstition, that it wavered in its frail tenement like "the baseless
fabric of a vision," threatening to depart, and leave not a wreck
behind. Clavers told her that her husband's life depended on the
promptness and sincerity of her answers, he having rendered himself
amenable to justice by rescuing his daughter by force, whom they had
taken prisoner on their arrival, having found her engaged in a very
suspicious employment. This only increased Maron's agony; and at length
Clavers was obliged to give up the point, and ordered her into custody.

The soldiers had by this time taken old John of the Muchrah and another
of Laidlaw's shepherds prisoners, who had come to assist their master
with the farm-work that day. All these Clavers examined separately; and
their answers, as taken down in short-hand by Mr Adam Copland, are still
extant, and at present in my possession. The following are some of them,
as decyphered by Mr J. W. Robertson, whose acquaintance with ancient
manuscripts is well known.

John Hay, shepherd in Muchrah, aged fifty-six, sworn and examined.

"Do you know such a man as the Rev. James Renwick?"

"Yes. I once heard him pray and preach for about the space of two
hours."

"Was it on your master's farm that he preached?"

"No, it was in a linn on the Earl Hill, in the march between two lairds'
lands, that he preached that day."

"How durst you go to an unlawful conventicle?"

"I didna ken there was a law against it till after--it's a wild place
this--we never hear ony o' the news, unless it be twice a-year frae the
Moffat fairs. But as soon as I heard him praying and preaching against
the king I cam aff an' left him, an' brought a' my lads an' lasses wi'
me; but my wife wadna steer her fit--there she sat, shaking her head and
glooming at me; but I trow I cowed her for't after."

"What did he say of the king?"

"O, I canna mind--he said nae muckle gude o' him."

"Did he say that he was a bloody perjured tyrant?"

"Ay, he said muckle waur nor that. He said some gayan ill-farr'd things
about him. But I cam away and left him; I thought he was saying mair
than gude manners warrantit."

"Were you in the Hope, as you call it; on that day that the king's
soldiers were slain?"

"Ay, that I was; I was the first wha came on them whan they war just
new dead, an' a' reeking i' their warm blude--Gude keep us a' frae sic
sights again!--for my part, I never gat sic a confoundit gliff sin' I
was born o' my mother."

"Describe the place where the corpses were lying."

"It is a deep cleuch, wi' a sma' sheep rodding through the linn not a
foot wide; and if ye war to stite aff that, ye wad gang to the boddom o'
the linn wi' a flaip."

"Were the bodies then lying in the bottom of that linn?"

"Odd help ye, whar could they be lying else?--D'ye think they could lie
on the Cleuch-brae? Ye might as weel think to lie on the side o' that
wa' gin ye war dead."

"How did it appear to you that they had been slain--were they cut with
swords, or pierced with bullets?"

"I canna say, but they war sair hashed."

"How do you mean when you say they were hashed?"

"Champit like--a' broozled and jurmummled, as it war."

"Do you mean that they were cut, or cloven, or minced?"

"Na, na--no that ava--But they had gotten some sair doofs--They had been
terribly paikit and daddit wi' something."

"I do not in the least conceive what you mean."

"That's extrordnar, man--can ye no understand folk's
mother-tongue?--I'll mak it plain to you. Ye see, whan a thing comes on
ye that gate, that's a dadd--sit still now. Then a paik, that's a swapp
or a skelp like--when a thing comes on ye that way, that's a paik. But a
doof's warst ava--it's"----

"Prithee hold; I now understand it all perfectly well.--What, then, is
your opinion with regard to these men's death? How, or what way do you
think they were killed?"

"O, sir, there's naebody can say. It was some extrordnar judgment,
that's out of a' doubt. There had been an unyerdly raid i' the Hope that
day."

"What reason have you for supposing such a thing?"

"Because there wasna a leevin soul i' the hale Hope that day but
theirsels--they wadna surely hae felled ane another--It's, by an'
attour, an awsome bit where they war killed; there hae been things baith
seen and heard about it; and I saw an apparition there mysel on the very
night before."

"You saw an apparition at the place the night before, did you? And,
pray, what was that apparition like?"

"It was like a man and a woman."

"Had the figure of the woman no resemblance to any one you had ever seen
before? Was it in any degree, for instance, like your master's
daughter?"

"No unlike ava."

"Then I think I can guess what the other form was like--Had it a bonnet
on its head?"

"Not a bonnet certainly, but it had the shape o' ane."

"I weened as much--And was it a tall gigantic figure?"

"Na, na, sir; the very contrair o' that."

"Are you certain of that you say? Was it not taller than the apparition
of the woman?"

"No half sae tall, sir."

"Had it not some slight resemblance to your master, little as it was?
Did that not strike you?"

"Na, na, it was naething like my master, nor nae yerdly creature that
ever was seen; indeed it was nae creature ava."

"What then do you suppose it was?"

"Lord kens!--A wraith, I hae little doubt. My een rins a' wi' water whan
I think about it yet."

"Wraiths are quite common here, are they?"

"O yes, sir!--oure common. They appear aye afore death, especially if
the death be to be sudden."

"And what are they generally like?"

"Sometimes like a light--sometimes like a windin-sheet--sometimes like
the body that's to dee, gaen mad--and sometimes like a coffin made o'
moon-light."

"Was it in the evening you saw this apparition?"

"It was a little after midnight."

"And pray, what might be your business in such a place at that untimely
hour?--Explain that fully to me if you please."

"I sall do that, sir, as weel as I can:--Our ewes, ye see, lie up in
the twa Grains an' the Middle a' the harst--Now, the Quave Brae again,
it's our hogg-fence, that's the hained grund like; and whenever the wind
gangs easterly about, then whan the auld luckies rise i' the howe o' the
night to get their rug, aff they come, snouckin a' the way to the Lang
Bank, an' the tither end o' them round the Piper Snout, and into the
Quave Brae to the hained grund; an' very often they think naething o'
landing i' the mids o' the corn. Now I never mindit the corn sae muckle;
but for them to gang wi' the hogg-fence, I coudna bide that ava; for ye
ken, sir, how coud we turn our hand wi' our pickle hoggs i' winter if
their bit foggage war a' riven up by the auld raikin hypalts ere ever a
smeary's clute clattered on't?"

Though Clavers was generally of an impatient temper, and loathed the
simplicity of nature, yet he could not help smiling at this elucidation,
which was much the same to him as if it had been delivered in the
language of the Moguls; but seeing the shepherd perfectly sincere, he
suffered him to go on to the end.

"Now, sir, ye ken the wind very often taks a swee away round to the
east i' the night-time whan the wather's gude i' the harst months, an'
whanever this was the case, and the moon i' the lift, I had e'en aye
obliged to rise at midnight, and gang round the hill an' stop the auld
kimmers--very little did the turn--just a bit thraw yont the brae, an'
they kend my whistle, or my tike's bark, as weel as I did mysel, still
they wadna do wantin't. Weel, ye see, sir, I gets up an' gangs to the
door--it was a bonny night--the moon was hingin o'er the derk brows o'
Hopertoody, an' the lang black scaddaws had an eiry look--I turned my
neb the tither gate, an' I fand the air was gane to the eissel; the
se'en starns had gaen oure the lum, an' the tail o' the king's elwand
was just pointin to the Muchrah Crags. It's the very time, quo' I to
mysel, I needna think about lying down again--I maun leave Janet to lie
doverin by hersel for an hour or twa--Keilder, my fine dog, where are
ye?--He was as ready as me--he likes a play i' the night-time brawly,
for he's aye gettin a broostle at a hare, or a tod, or a foumart, or
some o' thae beasts that gang snaikin about i' the derk. Sae to mak a
lang tale short, sir, off we sets, Keilder an' me, an' soon comes to the
place. The ewes had been very mensefu' that night, they had just comed
to the march and nae farther; sae, I says, puir things, sin' ye hae been
sae leifu', we'll sit down an' rest a while, the dog an' me, an' let ye
tak a pluck an' fill yersels or we turn ye back up to your cauld
lairs again. Sae down we sits i' the scaddaw of a bit derksome
cleuch-brae--naebody could hae seen us; and ere ever I wats, I hears by
the grumblin o' my friend, that he outher saw or smelled something mair
than ordinar. I took him in aneath my plaid for fear o' some grit
brainyell of an outbrik; and whan I lookit, there was a white thing and
a black thing new risen out o' the solid yird! They cam close by me; and
whan I saw the moon shinin on their cauld white faces, I lost my sight
an' swarfed clean away. Wae be to them for droichs, or ghaists, or
whatever they war, for aye sin' syne the hogg-fence o' the Quave Brae
has been harried an' traisselled till its little better nor a drift
road--I darna gang an' stop the ewes now for the saul that's i' my bouk,
an' little do I wat what's to come o' the hoggs the year."

"Well now, you have explained this much I believe to your own
satisfaction--Remember then, you are upon oath--Who do you think it was
that killed these men?"

"I think it was outher God or the deil, but whilk o' them, I coudna
say."

"And this is really your opinion?"

"Yes, it is."

"Have you seen any strangers about your master's house of late?"

"I saw one not long ago."

"What sort of a man was he?"

"A douse-looking man wi' a brown yaud; I took him for some wool-buyer."

"Was he not rather like a preacher?"

"The man might hae preached for aught contrair till't in his
appearance--I coudna say."

"Are you certain it was not Mr Renwick?"

"I am certain."

"Is your master a very religious man?"

"He's weel eneugh that way--No that very reithe on't; but the gudewife
hauds his neb right sair to the grindstane about it."

"Does he perform family worship?"

"Sometimes."

"Is he reckoned a great and exemplary performer of that duty?"

"Na, he's nae great gun, I trow; but he warstles away at it as weel as
he can."

"Can you repeat any part, or any particular passage of his usual
prayer?"

"I'm sure I might, for he gangs often aneuch oure some o' them. Let me
see--there's the still waters, and the green pastures, and the blood of
bulls and of goats; and then there's the gos-hawk, and the slogy riddle,
and the tyrant an' his lang neb; I hae the maist o't i' my head, but
then I canna mouband it."

"What does he mean by the tyrant and his long neb?"

"Aha! But that's mair nor ever I could find out yet. We whiles think he
means the Kelpy--him that raises the storms an' the floods on us, ye
ken, and gars the waters an' the burns come roarin down wi' bracks o'
ice an' snaw, an' tak away our sheep. But whether it's Kelpy, or
Clavers, or the Deil, we can never be sure, for we think it applies gay
an' weel to them a'."

"Repeat the passage as well as you can."

"Bring down the tyrant an' his lang neb, for he has done muckle ill this
year, and gie him a cup o' thy wrath; an' gin he winna tak that, gie him
kelty."

"What is meant by kelty?"

"That's double--it means twa cups--ony body kens that."

"Does he ever mention the king in his prayer?"

"O yes: always."

"What does he say about him?"

"Something about the sceptre of righteousness, and the standard of
truth. I ken he has some rhyme about him."

"Indeed! And does he likewise make mention of the Covenant?"

"Ay, that's after--that's near the end, just afore the resurrection. O
yes, he harls aye in the Covenant there. 'The bond o' the everlasting
Covenant,' as he ca's it, weel ordered in all things, and sure."

"Ay, that's very well; that's quite sufficient. Now, you have yourself
confessed, that you were at an unlawful and abominable conventicle,
holding fellowship with intercommuned rebels, along with your wife and
family. You _must_ be made an example of to the snarling and rebellious
hounds that are lurking in these bounds; but as you have answered me
with candour, though I might order you instantly to be shot, I will be
so indulgent as to give you your choice, whether you will go to prison
in Edinburgh, and be there tried by the Council, or submit to the
judgment which I may pronounce on you here?"

"O, sir, I canna win to Edinbrough at no rate--that's impossible. What
think ye wad come o' the sheep? The hogg-fence o' the Quave Brae is
maistly ruined already; and war I to gae to the prison at Edinbrough, it
wad be mair loss than a' that I'm worth. I maun just lippen to yoursel;
but ye maunna be very sair on me. I never did ony ill designedly; and as
for ony rebellion against the Bruce's blood, I wad be hangit or I wad
think o' sic a thing."

"Take the old ignorant animal away--Burn him on the cheek, cut off his
ears, and do not part with him till he pay you down a fine of two
hundred merks, or value to that amount. And, do you hear, make him take
all the oaths twice; and a third oath, that he is never to repent of
these. By G--; if either Monmouth or Argyle get him, they shall have a
perjured dog of him."

As John was dragged off to this punishment, which was executed without
any mitigation, he shook his head and said, "Ah, lak-a day! I fear
things are muckle waur wi' us than I had ony notion o'! I trowed aye
that even down truth an' honesty bure some respect till now--I fear our
country's a' wrang thegither."--Then looking back to Clavers, he added,
"Gude-sooth, lad, but ye'll mak mae whigs wherever ye show your face,
than a' the hill preachers o' Scotland put thegither."




CHAPTER IX.


It has been remarked by all the historians of that period, that the
proceedings of Clavers about this time were severe in the extreme. The
rising, both in the north and south at the same time, rendered the
situation of affairs somewhat ticklish. Still the Lowlands were then
perfectly peaceable; but he seemed determined, lest he should be called
away, to destroy the Covenanters, and all that hankered after civil and
religious liberty, root and branch. Certainly his behaviour at
Chapelhope that morning, was sufficient to stamp his character for ever
in that district, where it is still held in at least as great
detestation as that of the arch-fiend himself.

When the soldiers, by his order, seized and manacled Walter, he
protested vehemently against such outrage, and urged the general to
prove his fidelity to his sovereign by administering to him the test
oath, and the oath of abjuration; but this Clavers declined, and said to
him, with a sneer, that "they had other ways of trying dogs beside
that."

When those who had been appointed to search the house came before him,
and gave in their report, among other things, they said they had found
as much bread new baked, and mutton newly cooked, as would be a
reasonable allowance for an hundred men for at least one whole day.
Clavers remarked, that in a family so few in number, this was proof
positive that others were supported from that house. "But we shall
disappoint the whigs of one hearty meal," added he; and with that he
ordered the meat to be brought all out and set down upon the green--bid
his troopers eat as much as they could--feed their horses with the
bread which they left, and either destroy the remainder of the victuals
or carry them away.

It was in vain that Walter told him the honest truth, that the food was
provided solely for himself and his soldiers, as he knew they were to
come by that road, either on that day or the one following; nay, though
all the family avouched it, as they well might, he only remarked, with a
look of the utmost malignity, that "he never in his life knew a whig who
had not a d--d lie ready on his tongue, or some kind of equivocation to
save his stinking life, but that they must necessarily all be taught who
they were dealing with." He then made them all swear that they were to
tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, and to utter
the most horrid imprecations on themselves and their souls for ever, if
they deviated in one single item; and beginning with old John, as
before related, he examined them all separately and out of hearing of
one another.

The interrogations and answers are much too long to be inserted here at
full length; but the only new circumstances that came to light were
these two. One of the young men deponed, that, when the bodies of the
soldiers were found in the Hope, their muskets were all loaded, which
showed that they had not fallen in a regular skirmish; and the other boy
swore, that he had lately seen eighty large thick bannocks baked in one
day in his father's house, for that he had counted them three times over
as they stood cooling. This was another suspicious circumstance, and
Clavers determined to search it to the bottom. He sifted the two youths
backward and forward, trying to get the secret out of them by every wile
in his power; and because they were unable to give him any satisfactory
account who consumed all that store of bread, he caused his dragoons to
take hold of the youngest and gird his head with a cord, twisting it
with a horse pistol, until in some places it cut him to the skull. The
eldest he hung up to the beam by the thumbs until he fainted through
insufferable pain; but he could get nothing more out of them, for they
had at first told him all that they knew, being quite unconscious of any
evil.

Still bent, as it seemed, on the full conviction and ruin of the family,
he told the boys that they were two of the most consummate knaves and
rebels that he had in all his life seen; and that if they had any hopes
at all of going to Heaven, they should say their prayers, for in a few
minutes he would order them both to be shot.

John, the eldest, who possessed a good deal of his mother's feebleness
of character, and was besides but newly recovered from a fainting fit,
was seized with a stupor, appeared quite passive, and acted precisely as
they bade him, without seeming to know what he did; but the youngest,
whose name was William, preserved an interesting firmness, in such a
trial, for a considerable time. On being advised by Clavers to tell all
he knew rather than die, and asked if he was not afraid of death? He
answered, with the tear in his eye, "I'm nouther feared for you nor
death, man. I think if fock may be guidit this way at their ain hames,
the sooner they're dead the better." Then turning his looks to his
brother, who kneeled according to the general's order on the green
beside him, he added, with convulsive sobs, "But poor Jock's gaun to be
shot too--I wonder what ye need kill him for?--What ill hae we ever done
t'ye?--Jock's a very good callant--I canna pray weel, but if ye'll let
my billy Jock gang, I'll pray for ye as I can, and kiss ye too."

Happy was it for the wits of poor Maron that she saw nothing of this
touching scene; she, as well as Walter, being then with the rest under a
strong guard in the Old Room. Clavers paid no regard to the kneeling
boy's request. He caused his troopers to draw up around them, present
their firelocks, and then an executioner, who was always one of his
train, tied up both their eyes. He gave the word himself, and instantly
ten or twelve carabines were discharged on them at once. John fell flat
on the earth; but William, with a violent start, sprung to his feet,
and, being blindfolded, ran straight on the files of soldiers.

Clavers laid hold of him. "My brave little fellow," said he, "the
soldiers have all missed you, bungling beasts that they are! and since
so wonderful a thing hath befallen, you shall yet have your life, though
a most notorious rebel, if you will tell me what people frequent your
father's house."

"What's comed o' Jock?" said the boy, "O tell me what's comed o' Jock,
for I canna see."

"Jock is lying dead on the green there, all bathed in his blood," said
Clavers; "poor wretch! it is over with him, and unless you instantly
tell me who it was that consumed all that store of bread that has been
baked in your father's house for the last month, you must be sent after
him."

William withdrew backward a few paces, and kneeling a second time down
on the sward with great decency and deliberation, "Shoot again," said
he; "try me aince mair; an' O see to airch a wee better this time. I wad
rather dee a hunder times, or I saw poor Jock lying a bloody corp."

Clavers made a sign to one of his dragoons, who unbound William, and
took the bandage from his eyes. Regardless of all else, he looked wildly
around in search of his brother, and seeing his only companion lying
flat on his face, he at first turned away, as if wishing to escape from
a scene so dismal; but his helpless and forlorn situation staring him in
the face, and the idea doubtless recurring that he was never to part
with his brother, but forthwith to be slaughtered and carried to the
grave with him, he returned, went slowly up to the body, kneeled down
beside it, and pulling the napkin farther down over the face to keep the
dead features from view, he clasped his arms about his brother's neck,
laid his cheek to his, and wept bitterly.

The narrator of this part of the tale was wont to say, that the scene
which followed had something more touching in it than any tongue could
describe, although Clavers and his troops only laughed at it. William
had now quite relinquished all sensations of fear or danger, and gave
full vent to a flood of passionate tenderness and despair. He clasped
his brother's neck closer and closer, steeped his cheek with his tears,
and seemed to cling and grow to the body with a miserable fondness.
While he was giving full scope in this manner to the affections of his
young heart, his brother made a heave up with his head and shoulder,
saying at the same time, like one wakening from a dream, "Little Will,
is that you?--Haud aff--What ails ye?"

William raised up his head,--fixed his eyes on vacancy,--the tears
dried on his cheek, and his ruby lips were wide open,--the thing was
beyond his comprehension, and never was seen a more beautiful statue of
amazement. He durst not turn his eyes towards his brother, but he
uttered in words scarcely articulate, "Lord! I believe they hae missed
Jock too!"

Clavers had given private orders to his dragoons to fire over the heads
of the two boys, his intent being to intimidate them so much as to
eradicate every principle of firmness and power of concealment from
their tender minds; a scheme of his own fertile invention, and one which
he often practised upon young people with too sure effect. When William
found that his brother was really alive, and that both of them were to
be spared on condition that he gave up the names and marks of all the
people that had of late been at Chapelhope; he set himself with great
earnestness to recount them, along with every mark by which he
remembered them, determined that every hidden thing should be brought to
light, rather than that poor Jock should be shot at again.

"Weel, ye see, first there was Geordie Skin-him-alive the flesher, him
that took away the crocks and the paulies, and my brockit-lamb, and gae
me a penny for setting him through atween the lochs. Then there was
Hector Kennedy the tinkler, him that the bogles brought and laid down at
the door i' the night-time--he suppit twa bickerfu's o' paritch, an'
cleekit out a hantle o' geds an' perches wi' his toum. Then there was
Ned Huddersfield the woo-man, wi' the leather bags and the skeenzie
thread--him that kissed our bire-woman i' the barn in spite o' her
teeth,--he had red cheeks and grit thees, and wasna unlike a glutton; he
misca'd my father's woo, an' said aye, 'Nay, it's nane clean,
howsomever,--it's useless, that's its warst fault.' Then there was wee
Willie the nout herd, him that had the gude knife an' the duddy breeks;
but the Brownie's put him daft, an' his mither had to come an' tak him
away upon a cuddy."

In this manner went he on particularizing every one he remembered, till
fairly cut short with a curse. John continued perfectly stupid, and when
examined, answered only _Yes_, or _No_, as their way of asking the
question dictated.

"Are there not great numbers of people who frequent your father's house
during the night?"

"Yes."

"Do you see and hear them, after you go to bed?"

"Yes."

"What are they generally employed in when you hear them? Do they read,
and pray, and sing psalms?"

"Yes."

"Do your father and mother always join them?"

"Yes."

Here William could restrain himself no longer. "Gude faith, Jock, man,"
said he, "ye're just telling a hirsel o' eindown lees. It canna be lees
that the man wants, for that maks him nae the wiser; an' for you to say
that my father rises to pray i' the night-time, beats a', when ye ken my
mither has baith to fleitch an' fight or she can get him eggit on till't
i' the Sabbath e'enings. He's ower glad to get it foughten decently by,
to rise an' fa' till't again. O fye, Jock! I wad stand by the truth;
an', at ony rate, no just gaung to hell open mouth."

When the volley of musketry went off, all the prisoners started and
stared on one another; even the hundred veterans that guarded them
appeared by their looks to be wholly at a loss. Macpherson alone
ventured any remark on it. "Pe Cot's life, fat she pe pluff pluffing at
now? May the teal more pe her soul's salvation, if she do not believe te
man's pe gone out of all reason."

The women screamed; and Maron, whose tongue was a mere pendulum to the
workings of the heart within, went on sighing and praying; asking
questions, and answering them alternately; and at every pause, looked
earnestly to her husband, who leaned against the corner of the room,
ashamed that his bound hands should be seen.

"Och! Aigh me!" cried Maron,--"Dear sirs, what's the fock shootin
at?--Eh?--I'm sure they hae nae battlers to fight wi' there?--No ane--I
wat, no ane. Aigh now, sirs! the lives o' God's creatures!--They never
shoot nae callants, do they? Oh, na, na, they'll never shoot innocent
bairns, puir things! They'll maybe hae been trying how weel they could
vizy at the wild ducks; there's a hantle o' cleckins about the saughs o'
the lake. Hout ay, that's a'.--He hasna forgotten to be gracious, nor is
his mercy clean gane."

Thus poor Maron went on, and though she had but little discernment left,
she perceived that there was a tint of indignant madness in her
husband's looks. His lips quivered--his eyes dilated--and the wrinkles
on his brow rolled up to the roots of his dark grizzled hair, "Watie,"
cried she, in a shrill and tremulous voice--"Watie, what ails ye--Oh!
tell me what ails ye, Watie?--What's the fock shooting at? Eh? Ye'll no
tell me what they're shooting at, Watie?--Oh, oh, oh, oh!"

Walter uttered no word, nor did his daughter, who sat in dumb
astonishment, with her head almost bent to her feet; but old Nanny
joined in full chorus with her mistress, and a wild unearthly strain the
couple raised, till checked by Serjeant Roy Macpherson.

"Cot's curse be t--ning you to te everlasting teal! fat too-whooing pe
tat? Do you think that should the lenoch beg pe shot trou te poty, tat
is te son to yourself? Do you tink, you will too-whoo him up
akain?--Hay--Cot tamn, pe holding your paice."




CHAPTER X.


Upon the whole, there was no proof against Walter. Presumption was
against him, but the evidence was rather in his favour. Military law,
however, prevailed; and he found that there was no redress to be had of
any grievance or insult, that this petty tyrant, in his caprice, thought
fit to inflict. His drivers were ordered to take the whole stock from
the farms of Kirkinhope, belonging to David Bryden, who lived at a
distance, because it was proven, that Mr Renwick had preached and
baptized some children on the bounds of that farm. That stock he caused
to be taken to Selkirk, and sent orders to the sheriff to sell it by
public roup, at the cross, to the highest bidder; but with Walter's
stock he did not meddle at that time; so far did justice mark his
proceedings. He strongly suspected him, and wished to have him
convicted; and certainly would have taken all the family with him
prisoners, had not the curate-clerk arrived at that critical time. Him
Clavers consulted apart, and was soon given to understand the steadfast
loyalty of the gudewife, daughter, and all the family, save Walter,
whom, he said, he suspected of a secret connivance with the Cameronians.
This was merely to serve a selfish purpose, for the clerk suspected no
such thing at that time. It had the desired effect. Clavers set all the
rest of the family free, but took the good man with him prisoner; put
two of his best horses in requisition; mounted himself on a diminutive
poney, with the thumbikins on his hands, and his feet chained below its
belly. In this degrading situation, he was put under the care of
Serjeant Roy Macpherson and five troopers; and Clavers, with the rest
of his company, hasted, with great privacy and celerity, into that
inhospitable wild, which forms the boundary between Drummelzier and the
Johnstons of Annandale. The greater part of the fugitives had taken
shelter there at that time, it being the most inaccessible part in the
south of Scotland, and that where, of all others, they had been the
least troubled. No troops could subsist near them; and all that the
military could do was to set watches near every pass to and from these
mountains, where a few stragglers were killed, but not many in
proportion to the numbers that had there sought a retreat.

The Covenanters knew that Clavers would make a sweeping and
exterminating circuit about that time--incidents which were not to be
overlooked, had been paving the way for it--incidents with which the
main body of that people were totally unconnected. But it was usual at
that time, and a very unfair practice it was, that whatever was said,
or perpetrated, by any intemperate fanatical individual, or any crazy
wight, driven half mad by ill usage--whatever was said or done by such,
was always attributed to the whole sect as a body. It is too true that
the Privy Council chose, invariably, men void of all feeling or remorse
to lead these troops. A man had nothing to study but to be cruel enough
to rise in the army in those days; yet, because there was a Dalziel, a
Graham, a Creighton, and a Bruce among the king's troops, it would be
unfair to suppose all the rest as void of every principle of feeling and
forbearance as they. In like manner, because some of the Covenanters
said violent and culpable things, and did worse, it is hard to blame the
whole body for these; for, in the scattered prowling way in which they
were driven to subsist, they had no controul over individuals.

They had been looking for the soldiers' appearing there for several
days, and that same morning had been on the watch; but the day was now
so far advanced that they were waxen remiss, and had retired to their
dens and hiding-places. Besides, he came so suddenly upon them, that
some parties, as well as several stragglers, were instantly discovered.
A most determined pursuit ensued, Clavers exerted himself that day in
such a manner, gallopping over precipices, and cheering on his dragoons,
that all the country people who beheld him believed him to be a devil,
or at least mounted on one. The marks of that infernal courser's feet
are shewn to this day on a steep, nearly perpendicular, below the Bubbly
Craig, along which he is said to have ridden at full speed, in order to
keep sight of a party of the flying Covenanters. At another place,
called the Blue Sklidder, on the Merk side, he had far outrode all his
officers and dragoons in the pursuit of five men, who fled straggling
athwart the steep. He had discharged both his pistols without effect;
and just as he was making ready to cleave down the hindmost with his
sabre, he was attacked by another party, who rolled huge stones at him
from the precipice above, and obliged him to make a hasty retreat.

Tradition has preserved the whole of his route that day with the utmost
minuteness. It is not easy to account for this. These minute traditions
are generally founded on truth; yet though two generations have scarcely
passed away since the date of this tale,[A] tradition, in this instance,
relates things impossible, else Clavers must indeed have been one of the
infernals. Often has the present relater of this tale stood over the
deep green marks of that courser's hoof, many of which remain on that
hill, in awe and astonishment, to think that he was actually looking at
the traces made by the devil's foot, or at least by a horse that once
belonged to him.

Five men were slain that day; but as they were all westland men, very
little is known concerning them. One of them was shot at a distance by
some dragoons who were in pursuit of him, just as he was entering a
morass, where he would certainly have escaped them. He is buried on a
place called the Watch Knowe, a little to the south-east of Loch Skene,
beside a cairn where he had often sat keeping watch for the approach of
enemies, from which circumstance the height derived its name. When he
fell, it being rough broken ground, they turned and rode off without
ever going up to the body. Four were surprised and taken prisoners on a
height called Ker-Cleuch-Ridge, who were brought to Clavers and shortly
examined on a little crook in the Erne Cleuch, a little above the old
steading at Hopertoudy.

Macpherson kept the high road, such as it was, with his prisoner; but
travelled no faster than just to keep up with the parties that were
scouring the hills on each side; and seeing these unfortunate men hunted
in from the hill, he rode up with his companions and charge to see the
issue, remarking to Walter, that "he woolt not pe much creat deal te
worse of scheeing fwat te Cot t--n'd fwigs would pe getting."

How did Walter's heart smite him when he saw that one of them was the
sensible, judicious, and honourable fellow with whom he fought, and
whose arm he had dislocated by a blow with his stick! It was still
hanging in a sling made of a double rash rope.

They would renounce nothing, confess nothing, nor yield, in the
slightest degree, to the threats and insulting questions put by the
general. They expected no mercy, and they cringed for none; but seemed
all the while to regard him with pity and contempt. Walter often said
that he was an ill judge of the cause for which these men suffered; but
whatever might be said of it, they were heroes in that cause. Their
complexions were sallow, and bore marks of famine and other privations;
their beards untrimmed; their apparel all in rags, and their hats
slouched down about their ears with sleeping on the hills. All this they
had borne with resignation and without a murmur; and, when brought to
the last, before the most remorseless of the human race, they shewed no
symptoms of flinching or yielding up an item of the cause they had
espoused.

When asked "if they would pray for the king?"

They answered, "that they would with all their hearts;--they would pray
for his forgiveness, in time and place convenient, but not when every
profligate bade them, which were a loathful scurrility, and a mockery of
God."

"Would they acknowledge him as their right and lawful sovereign?"

"No, that they would never do! He was a bloody and designing papist,
and had usurped a prerogative that belonged not to him. To acknowledge
the Duke of York for king, would be to acknowledge the divine
approbation of tyranny, oppression, usurpation, and all that militates
against religion or liberty, as well as justifying the abrogation of our
ancient law relating to the succession; and that, besides, he had
trampled on every civil and religious right, and was no king for
Scotland, or any land where the inhabitants did not chuse the most
abject and degrading slavery. For their parts, they would never
acknowledge him; and though it was but little that their protestations
and their blood could avail, they gave them freely. They had but few
left to mourn for them, and these few might never know of their fate;
but there was _One_ who knew their hearts, who saw their sufferings, and
in Him they trusted that the days of tyranny and oppression were wearing
to a close, and that a race yet to come might acknowledge that they had
not shed their blood in vain."

Clavers ordered them all to be shot. They craved time to pray, but he
objected, sullenly alleging, that he had not time to spare. Mr Copland
said,--"My lord, you had better grant the poor wretches that small
indulgence." On which Clavers took out his watch, and said he would
grant them two minutes, provided they did not howl. When the man with
the hurt arm turned round to kneel, Walter could not help crying out to
him in a voice half stifled with agony--

"Ah! lak-a-day, man! is it come to this with you, and that so soon? This
is a sad sight!"

The man pretended to put on a strange and astonished look towards his
benefactor.

"Whoever you are," said he, "that pities the sufferings of a hapless
stranger, I thank you. May God requite you! but think of yourself, and
apply for mercy where it is to be found, for you are in the hands of
those whose boast it is to despise it."

Walter at first thought this was strange, but he soon perceived the
policy of it, and wondered at his friend's readiness at such an awful
hour, when any acknowledgment of connection would have been so fatal to
himself. They kneeled all down, clasped their hands together, turned
their faces to Heaven, and prayed in a scarce audible whisper. Captain
Bruce, in the mean time, kneeled behind the files, and prayed in
mockery, making a long face, wiping his eyes, and speaking in such a
ludicrous whine, that it was impossible for the gravest face to retain
its muscles unaltered. He had more to attend to him than the miserable
sufferers. When the two minutes were expired, Clavers, who held his
watch all the time, made a sign to the dragoons who were drawn up,
without giving any intimation to the sufferers, which, perhaps, was
merciful, and in a moment all the four were launched into eternity.

The soldiers, for what reason Walter never understood, stretched the
bodies all in a straight line on the brae, with their faces upwards, and
about a yard distant from one another, and then rode off as fast as they
could to get another hunt, as they called it. These four men were
afterwards carried by the fugitives, and some country people, and
decently interred in Ettrick church-yard. Their graves are all in a row
a few paces from the south-west corner of the present church. The
goodman of Chapelhope, some years thereafter, erected a head-stone over
the grave of the unfortunate sufferer whose arm he had broken, which,
with its rude sculpture, is to be seen to this day. His name was Walter
Biggar. A small heap of stones is raised on the place where they were
shot.

The last look which Walter took of the four corpses, as they lay
stretched on the brae, with the blood streaming from them, had nearly
turned his brain. His heart sunk within him. For years and days they
never left his mind's eye, sleeping nor waking. He always thought he saw
them lying on the green sloping brae, with their pale visages, blue open
lips, clasped hands, and dim stedfast eyes still fixed on the Heavens.
He had heard Clavers and his officers called heroes: He wished those who
believed so had been there that day to have judged who were the greatest
heroes.

"There! let them take that!" said Captain Bruce, as he mounted his
horse.

"Poor misled unfortunate beings!" said Copland, and mounted his.

"Huh! Cot t--n!" said Roy Macpherson, in a voice that seemed to struggle
for an outlet; and Walter, to his astonishment, saw a tear glistening on
his rough weather-beaten cheek, as he turned to ride away!

The pursuit continued unabated for the whole of that day. There was a
great deal of firing, but the hills of Polmoody were inaccessible to
cavalry. There was no more blood shed. They lodged that night at a place
called Kippelgill, where they put every thing in requisition about the
house, and killed some of the cattle. Clavers was in extremely bad
humour, and Walter had no doubt that he once intended to have sacrificed
him that night, but seemed to change his mind, after having again
examined him. He was very stern, and threatened him with the torture,
swearing that he knew him to be the supporter of that nest of miscreants
that harboured around him, and that though he should keep him prisoner
for a dozen years, he would have it proven on him. Walter made oath that
there had never one of them been within his door, consistent with his
knowledge; that he had never been at a conventicle; and proffered to
take the test, and oath of abjuration, if allowed to do so. All this
would not satisfy Clavers. Walter said he wondered at his discernment,
for, without the least evil or disloyal intent, he found he had rendered
himself liable to punishment, but how he could be aware of that he knew
not.

That night Walter was confined in a cow-house, under the same guard that
had conducted him from Chapelhope. The soldiers put his arms round one
of the stakes for the cattle, and then screwed on the thumbikins, so
that he was fastened to the stake without being much incommoded. When
Macpherson came in at a late hour, (for he was obliged likewise to take
up his abode in the cow-house over night), the first word he said was,--

"Cot t--n, she no pe liking to schee an honest shentleman tied up to a
stake, as she were peing a poollock."

He then began to lecture Walter on the magnitude of folly it would be in
him to run away, "when he took it into consideration that he had a ponny
fhamily, and sheeps, and horses, and bheasts, that would all pe maide
acchountable."

Walter acknowledged the force of his reasoning; said it was sterling
common sense, and that nothing would induce him to attempt such a
dangerous experiment as attempting to make his escape. Macpherson then
loosed him altogether, and conversed with him until he fell asleep.
Walter asked him, what he thought of his case with the general?
Macpherson shook his head. Walter said there was not the shadow of a
proof against him!

"No!" said Macpherson; "py cot's curse but there is! There is very much
deal of proof. Was not there my countrymen and scholdiers murdered on
your grhounds? Was not there mhore scoans, and prochin, and muttons in
your house, than would have peen eaten in a mhonth by the fhamily that
pelongs to yourself. By the pode more of the auld deal, but there is
more proof than would hang twenty poor peheoples."

"That's but sma' comfort, man! But what think ye I should do?"

"Cot t--n, if I know!--Who is it that is your Chief?"

"Chief!--What's that?"

"Tat is te head of te clan--Te pig man of your name and fhamily."

"In troth, man, an' there isna ane o' my name aboon mysel."

"Fwat? Cot's everlasting plissing! are you te chief of te clan,
M'Leadle? Then, sir, you are a shentleman indeed. Though your clan
should pe never so poor, you are a shentleman; and you must pe giving me
your hand; and you need not think any shame to pe giving me your hand;
for hersel pe a shentleman pred and porn, and furst coosin to Cluny
Macpherson's sister-in-law. Who te deal dha more she pe this clan,
M'Leadle? She must be of Macleane. She ance pe prhother to ourselves,
but fell into great dishunity by the preaking off of Finlay Gorm More
Machalabin Macleane of Ilanterach and Ardnamurchan."

Walter having thus set Daniel Roy Macpherson on the top of his
hobby-horse by chance, there was no end of the matter! He went on with
genealogies of uncouth names, and spoke of some old free-booters as the
greatest of all kings. Walter had no means of stopping him, but by
pretending to fall asleep, and when Macpherson weened that no one was
listening farther to him, he gave up the theme, turned himself over, and
uttered some fervent sentences in Gaelic, with heavy moans between.

"What's that you are saying now," said Walter, pretending to rouse
himself up.

"Pe sad works this," said he. "Huh! Cot in heaven aye! Hersel would be
fighting te Campbells, sword in hand, for every inch of the Moor of
Rhanoch; but Cot t--n, if she like to pe pluffing and shooting through
te podies of te poor helpless insignificant crheatures. T--n'd foolish
ignorant peheople! Cot t--n, if she pe having the good sense and
prhudence of a bheast."

Walter commended his feeling, and again asked his advice with regard to
his own conduct.

"Who is te great man tat is te laird to yourself?" asked he.

"Mr Hay of Drumelzier," was answered.

"Then lose not a mhoment in getting his very good report or security.
All goes by that. It will do more ghood than any stock of innocence; and
you had need to look very sharp, else he may soon cut you short. It's a
very good and a very kind man, but she pe caring no more for the lives
of peoples, tan I would do for as many ptarmigans."

Walter pondered on this hint throughout the night; and the more he did
so the more he was convinced, that, as the affairs of the country were
then conducted, Macpherson's advice was of the first utility. He sent
for one of the shepherds of Kippelgill next morning, charged him with an
express to his family, and unable to do any thing further for himself,
submitted patiently to his fate.

Clavers having been informed that night that some great conventicles had
been held to the southward, he arose early, crossed the mountains by the
Pennera Corse, and entered that district of the south called Eskdale.
He had run short of ammunition by the way, and knowing of no other
supply, dispatched Bruce with 20 men by the way of Ettrick, to plunder
the aisle where the ancient and noble family of the Scotts of Thirlstane
were enshrined in massy leaden chests. From these he cut the lids, and
otherwise damaged them, scattering the bones about in the aisle; but the
Scotts of Daventon shortly after gathered up the relics of their
ancestors, which they again deposited in the chests,--closed them up
with wooden lids, and buried them deep under the aisle floor, that they
might no more be discomposed by the hand of wanton depravity.

At a place called the Steps of Glenderg, Clavers met with Sir James
Johnston of Westeraw, with fifty armed men, who gave him an exaggerated
account of the district of Eskdale, telling him of such and such
field-meetings, and what inflammatory discourses had there been
delivered, insinuating all the while that the whole dale ought to be
made an example of. Clavers rejoiced in his heart at this, for the works
of devastation and destruction were beginning to wear short. The
Covenanters were now so sorely reduced, that scarcely durst one show his
face, unless it were to the moon and stars of Heaven. A striking
instance of this I may here relate by the way, as it happened on the
very day to which my tale has conducted me.

A poor wanderer, named, I think, Matthew Douglas, had skulked about
these mountains, chiefly in a wild glen, called the Caldron, ever since
the battle of Bothwell-bridge. He had made several narrow, and, as he
thought, most providential escapes, but was at length quite overcome by
famine, cold, and watching; and finding his end approaching, he crept by
night into a poor widow's house at Kennelburn, whose name, if my
informer is not mistaken, was Ann Hyslop. Ann was not a Cameronian, but
being of a gentle and humane disposition, she received the dying man
kindly--watched, and even wept over him, administering to all his wants.
But the vital springs of life were exhausted and dried up: He died on
the second day after his arrival, and was buried with great privacy, by
night, in the church-yard at Westerkirk.

Sir James Johnston had been a zealous Covenanter, and at first refused
the test with great indignation; but seeing the dangerous ground on
which he stood and that his hand was on the lion's mane, he renounced
these principles; and, to render his apostacy effective, became for a
time a most violent distresser of his former friends. He knew at this
time that Clavers was coming round; and in order to ingratiate himself
with him, he had for several days been raging up and down the country
like a roaring lion, as they termed it. It came to his ears what Ann
Hyslop had done; whereon, pretending great rage, he went with his party
to the burial ground, digged the body out of the grave, and threw it
over the church-yard wall for beasts of prey to devour. Forthwith he
proceeded to Kennelburn--plundered the house of Ann Hyslop, and then
burnt it to ashes; but herself he could not find, for she had previously
absconded. Proceeding to the boundary of the county, he met and welcomed
Clavers to his assistance, breathing nothing but revenge against all
non-conformists, and those of his own district in particular.

Clavers knew mankind well. He perceived the moving cause of all this,
and did not appear so forward and hearty in the business as Sir James
expected. He resolved to ravage Eskdale, but to manage matters so that
the whole blame might fall on Johnston. This he effected so completely,
that he made that knight to be detested there as long as he lived, and
his memory to be abhorred after his decease. He found him forward in the
cause; and still the more so that he appeared to be, the more shy and
backward was Clavers, appearing to consent to every thing with
reluctance. They condemned the stocks of sheep on Fingland and the
Casways on very shallow grounds. Clavers proposed to spare them; but Sir
James swore that they should not be spared, that their owners might
learn the value of conventicles.

"Well, well," said Clavers, "since you will have it so, let them be
driven off."

In this manner they proceeded down that unhappy dale, and at Craikhaugh,
by sheer accident, lighted on Andrew Hyslop, son to the widow of
Kennelburn above-mentioned. Johnston apprehended him, cursed,
threatened, and gnashed his teeth on him with perfect rage. He was a
beautiful youth, only nineteen years of age. On his examination, it
appeared that he had not been at home, nor had any hand in sheltering
the deceased; but he knew, he said, that his mother had done so, and in
doing it, had done well; and he was satisfied that act of her's would be
approven of in the eye of the Almighty.

Clavers asked, "Have you ever attended the field conventicles?"

"No."

"Have you ever preached yourself?"

"No."

"Do you think that you could preach?"

"I am sure I could not."

"I'll be d--d but you can pray then," said he.

He then proffered him his liberty if he would confess that his mother
had done wrong, but this he would in no wise do; for, he said, it would
be a sinful and shameful lie, he being convinced that his mother had
done what was her duty, and the duty of every Christian to do towards
his fellow-creatures.

Johnston swore he should be shot. Clavers hesitated, and made some
objections; but the other persisting, as Clavers knew he would, the
latter consented, as formerly, saying, "Well, well, since you will have
it so, let it be done--his blood be on your head, I am free of
it.--Daniel Roy Macpherson, draw up your file, and put the sentence in
execution."

Hyslop kneeled down. They bade him put on his bonnet, and draw it over
his eyes; but this he calmly refused, saying, "He had done nothing of
which he was ashamed, and could look on his murderers and to Heaven
without dismay."

When Macpherson heard this, and looked at him as he kneeled on the
ground with his hands pinioned, his beautiful young face turned toward
the sky, and his long fair ringlets hanging waving backward, his heart
melted within him, and the great tears had for sometime been hopping
down his cheeks. When Clavers gave the word of command to shoot the
youth, Macpherson drew up his men in a moment--wheeled them off at the
side--presented arms--and then answered the order of the general as
follows, in a voice that was quite choaked one while, and came forth in
great vollies at another--"Now, Cot t--n--sh--sh--she'll rather pe
fighting Clavers and all her draghoons, pe--pe--pefore she'll pe killing
tat dear good lhad."

Captain Bruce burst out into a horse-laugh, leaping and clapping his
hands on hearing such a singular reply; even Clavers had much ado to
suppress a smile, which, however, he effected by uttering a horrible
curse.

"I had forgot, Sir James," said he; "Macpherson is as brave a man as
ever strode on a field of battle; but in domestic concerns, he has the
heart of a chicken."

He then ordered four of his own guards to shoot him, which they executed
in a moment. Some of his acquaintances being present, they requested
permission of Clavers to bury him, which he readily granted, and he was
interred on the very spot where he fell. A grave stone was afterwards
erected over him, which is still to be seen at Craikhaugh, near the side
of the road, a little to the north of the Church of Eskdale-muir.

Clavers and his prisoner lodged at Westeraw that night. Johnston wanted
to have him shot; but to this Clavers objected, though rather in a
jocular manner.

Walter said, he was sure if Sir James had repeated his request another
time, that Clavers' answer would have been, "Well, well, since you will
have it so," &c.; but, fortunately for Walter, he desisted just in time.

These two redoubted champions continued their progress all next day; and
on the third, at evening, Clavers crossed Dryfe, with nine thousand
sheep, three hundred goats, and about as many cattle and horses, in his
train, taken from the people of Eskdale alone. He took care to herry Sir
James's tenants, in particular, of every thing they possessed, and
apparently all by their laird's desire, so that very little of the blame
attached to the general. He was heard to say to Sir Thomas Livingston
that night, "I trow, we hae left the silly turn-coat a pirn to
wind."--But we must now leave them to continue their route of rapine
and devastation, and return to the distressed family of Chapelhope, in
order that we may watch the doings of the Brownie of Bodsbeck.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] One of the women baptized in the Linn of Riskinhope by Renwick that
year, has several children yet alive, not very aged people.




CHAPTER XI.


For all Maron Linton's grievous distresses, the arrival of Clerk, the
curate, proved an antidote of no small avail. It was a great comfort to
her, in the midst of her afflictions; and after she had been assured by
him of Walter's perfect safety, she became apparently more happy, and
certainly more loquacious, than she had been for a great while byegone.
She disclosed to him the dreadful secret, that her child was possessed
of an evil spirit, and implored his influence with Heaven, and his power
with hell, for its removal. This he readily undertook, on condition of
being locked up with the maiden for a night, or two at most. She was to
be left solely to his management; without the interference of any other
human being; and with the help only of the Bible, the lamp, and the
hour-glass, he declared that he would drive the unclean spirit from his
tabernacle of clay.

To these conditions Maron Linton gladly assented; and, with grateful and
fond acknowledgments, called him their benefactor and spiritual guide,
their deliverer and shield; but he checked her, and said, there was
still one condition more on which she behoved to condescend. It was
likely that he might be under the hard necessity of using some violent
measures in exorcising her, for it would be hard to drive the malignant
spirit from so sweet a habitation; but whatever noises might be heard,
no one was to interfere, or even listen, upon pain of being delivered up
to the foul spirit, soul and body; and it was ten to one that any who
was so imprudent as to intrude on these awful and mysterious rites,
might be torn in pieces.

Maron blest herself from all interference, and gave Nanny directions to
the same purport; as for the two boys, they slept out of hearing. She
likewise gave him the key, that he might lock both the doors of the Old
Room in the inside, and thus prevent all intrusions, should any be
offered. He said prayers in the family, to which Katharine was admitted;
and then taking the lamp and the hour-glass in his hand, and the Bible
below his arm, he departed into the Old Room, where, in about half an
hour afterwards, the maiden was summoned to attend him. He took her
respectfully by the hand, and seated her on a chair at the side of the
bed, saying, that he was commissioned by her worthy mother to hold a
little private conversation with her. Then locking the door, and putting
the key in his pocket, he added, "You are my prisoner for this night,
but be not alarmed; I have undertaken to drive an evil spirit away from
you, but both my exorcisms and orisons shall be adapted to the feelings
of a young maiden, and as agreeable to one whom I so much admire, as it
is in my power to make them."

Katharine grew as pale as death as he uttered these words, and placed
himself cordially by her side.

It is unmeet to relate the conversation that ensued; but the worthy
curate soon showed off in his true colours, and with unblushing front
ventured a proposal that shocked the innocent and modest Katharine so
much, that she could only reply to it by holding up her hands, and
uttering a loud exclamation of astonishment. His further precedure soon
convinced her, that she was in the hands of a man who was determined to
take every advantage of the opportunity thus unwarrantably afforded him,
and to stick at no atrocity for the accomplishment of his purposes.

She neither descended to tears nor entreaties, but resisted all his
approaches with a firmness and dignity that he never conceived to have
formed any part of her character; and, when continuing to press her
hand, she said to him, "You had better keep your distance, Mass John
Clerk, and consider what befits your character, and the confidence
reposed in you by my unsuspecting parent; but I tell you, if you again
presume to touch me, though it were but with one of your fingers, I
will, in a moment, bring those out of the chink of the wall, or from
under that hearth, that shall lay you motionless at my feet in the
twinkling of an eye, or bear you off to any part of the creation that I
shall name."

He smiled as she said this, and was about to turn it into a jest; but on
looking at her face, he perceived that there was not one trait of
jocularity in it. It beamed with a mystical serenity which sent a
chillness through his whole frame; and, for the first time, he deemed
her deranged, or possessed in some manner, he wist not how. Staunch,
however, to his honourable purpose, he became so unequivocal, that she
was obliged to devise some means of attaining a temporary cessation; and
feigning to hesitate on his proposal, she requested a minute or two to
speak.

"I am but young, Mass John," said she, "and have no experience in the
ways of the world; and it seems, from what you have advanced, that I
attach more importance to some matters than they deserve. But I beg of
you to give me a little time to reflect on the proposal you have made.
See that hour-glass is half run out already: I only ask of you not to
disturb or importune me until it run out a second time."

"And do you then promise to do as I request?" said he.

"I do," returned she, "provided you still continue of the same mind as
you are now."

"My mind is made up," said he, "and my resolution taken in all that
relates to you; nevertheless, it would be hard to refuse a maid so
gentle and modest a request--I grant it--and should you attempt to break
off your engagement at the expiry of the time, it shall be the worse for
you."

"Be it so," replied she; "in the meantime let me be undisturbed till
then." And so saying, she arose and went aside to the little table where
the Bible and the lamp were placed, and began with great seriousness to
search out, and peruse parts of the sacred volume.

Clerk liked not this contemplative mood, and tried every wile in his
power to draw her attention from the Scriptures. He sought out parts
which he desired her to read, if she would read; but from these she
turned away without deigning to regard them, and gently reminded him
that he had broken one of his conditions. "Maids only impose such
conditions on men," said he, "as they desire should be broken." At this
she regarded him with a look of ineffable contempt, and continued to
read on in her Bible.

The hour of midnight was now passed,--the sand had nearly run out for
the second time since the delay had been acceded to, and Clerk had been
for a while tapping the glass on the side, and shaking it, to make it
empty its contents the sooner. Katharine likewise began to eye it with
looks that manifested some degree of perturbation; she clasped the
Bible, and sate still in one position, as if listening attentively for
some sound or signal. The worthy curate at length held the hour-glass up
between her eye and the burning lamp,--the last lingering pile of sand
fell reluctantly out as he shook it in that position,--anxiety and
suspense settled more deeply on the lovely and serene face of Katharine;
but instead of a flexible timidity, it assumed an air of sternness. At
that instant the cock crew,--she started,--heaved a deep sigh, like one
that feels a sudden relief from pain, and a beam of joy shed its
radiance over her countenance. Clerk was astonished,--he could not
divine the source or cause of her emotions, but judging from his own
corrupt heart, he judged amiss. True however to his point, he reminded
her of her promise, and claimed its fulfilment. She deigned no reply to
his threats or promises, but kept her eye steadfastly fixed on another
part of the room. He bade her remember that he was not to be mocked, and
in spite of her exertions, he lifted her up in his arms, and carried her
across the room towards the bed. She uttered a loud scream, and in a
moment the outer-door that entered from the bank was opened, and a being
of such unearthly dimensions entered, as you may never wholly define. It
was the Brownie of Bodsbeck, sometimes mentioned before, small of
stature, and its whole form utterly mis-shaped. Its beard was long and
grey, while its look, and every lineament of its face, were indicative
of agony--its locks were thin, dishevelled, and white, and its back
hunched up behind its head. There seemed to be more of the same species
of hagard beings lingering behind at the door, but this alone advanced
with a slow majestic pace. Mass John uttered two involuntary cries,
somewhat resembling the shrill bellowings of an angry bull, mixed with
inarticulate rumblings,--sunk powerless on the floor, and, with a deep
shivering groan, fainted away. Katharine, stretching forth her hands,
flew to meet her unearthly guardian;--"Welcome, my watchful and
redoubted Brownie," said she; "thou art well worthy to be familiar with
an empress, rather than an insignificant country maiden."

    "Brownie's here, Brownie's there
    Brownie's with thee every where,"

said the dwarfish spirit, and led her off in triumph.

Having bethought herself after she went out, she returned lightly, took
the keys from the pocket of the forlorn priest, extinguished the lamp,
and again disappeared, locking the door on the outside.

Mass John's trance threw him into a heavy and perturbed slumber, which
overpowered him for a long space; and even after he awaked, it was long
before he could fathom the circumstances of his case, for he imagined he
had only been in a frightful and oppressive dream; till, beginning to
grope about, he discovered that he was lying on the damp floor with his
clothes on; and at length, without opening his eyes, he recovered by
degrees his reasoning faculties, and was able to retrace the
circumstances that led to his present situation. He arose in great
dismay--the day-light had begun to shine into the room, and finding that
both doors were locked, he deemed it unadvisable to make any noise, and
threw himself upon the bed. The retrospect of his adventure was fraught
with shame and astonishment. He had acted a considerable part in it, but
he had dreamed of a great deal more, and with all his ingenuity he could
not separate in his mind the real incidents from those that were
imaginary. He arose with the sun, and rapped gently at the inner-door,
which, to his still farther astonishment, was opened by Katharine, in
her usual neat and cleanly morning dress. He stared in her face, to mark
if he could read any meaning in it--he could distinguish none that spoke
a language to him either good or bad--it was a face of calm decent
serenity, and wore no shade of either shame or anger--somewhat paler
than it was the evening before, but still as lovely as ever. The curate
seemed gasping for breath, but not having courage to address her, he
walked forth to the open air.

It was a beautiful morning in September; the ground was covered with a
slight hoar frost, and a cloud of light haze (or as the country people
call it, _the blue ouder_,) slept upon the long valley of water, and
reached nearly midway up the hills. The morning sun shone full upon it,
making it appear like an ocean of silvery down. It vanished by
imperceptible degrees into the clear blue firmament, and was succeeded
by a warm sun and a southerly breeze. It was such a morning as could
not fail to cheer and re-animate every heart and frame, not wholly
overcome by guilt and disease--Clark's were neither--he was depraved of
heart, but insensible to the evil of such a disposition; he had,
moreover, been a hanger-on from his youth upward, and had an effrontery
not to be outfaced. Of course, by the time he had finished a
three-hour's walk, he felt himself so much refreshed and invigorated in
mind, that he resolved not to expose himself to the goodwife, who was
his principal stay and support among his straggled and dissatisfied
flock, by a confession of the dreadful fright he had gotten, but to
weather out the storm with as lofty and saintly a deportment as he
could.

He had not well gone out when the lad of Kepplegill arrived, and
delivered to Katharine her father's letter. She saw the propriety of the
injunction which it bore, and that an immediate application to their
laird, Drumelzier, who was then high in trust and favour with the party
in power, was the likeliest of all ways to procure her father's relief,
neither durst she trust the mission to any but herself. But ah! there
was a concealed weight that pressed upon her spirit--a secret
circumstance that compelled her to stay at home, and which could not be
revealed to mortal ear. Her father's fate was at present uncertain and
ticklish, but that secret once revealed, tortures, death, and ruin were
inevitable--the doom of the whole family was sealed. She knew not what
to do, for she had none to advise with. There was but one on earth to
whom this secret could be imparted; indeed there was but one in whose
power it was to execute the trust which the circumstances of the case
required, and that was old Nanny, who was crazed, fearless, and
altogether inscrutable. Another trial, however, of her religious
principles, and adherence to the established rules of church government
in the country, was absolutely necessary; and to that trial our young
and mysterious heroine went with all possible haste, as well as
precaution.

Whosoever readeth this must paint to themselves old Nanny, and they must
paint her aright, with her thin fantastic form and antiquated dress,
bustling up and down the house. Her fine stock of bannocks had been all
exhausted--the troopers and their horses had left nothing in her
master's house that could either be eaten or conveniently carried away.
She had been early astir, as well as her sedate and thoughtful young
dame, had been busy all the morning, and the whole time her tongue never
at rest. She had been singing one while, speaking to herself another,
and every now and then intermixing bitter reflections on Clavers and his
troops.

"Wae be to them for a pack o' greedy gallayniels--they haena the mence
of a miller's yaud; for though she'll stap her nose into every body's
pock, yet when she's fou she'll carry naething wi' her. Heichow! wae's
me, that I sude hae lived to see the day! That ever I sude hae lived to
see the colehood take the laverock's place; and the stanchel and the
merlin chatterin' frae the cushat's nest! Ah! wae's me! will the sweet
voice o' the turtle-doo be nae mair heard in our land! There was a time
when I sat on the bonny green brae an' listened to it till the tears
dreepit frae my een, an' a' the hairs o' my head stood on end!--The
hairs o' my head?--Ay, that's nae lie! They're grey now, an' will soon
be snaw-white if heart's care can alter them; but they will never be sae
white as they anes war. I saw the siller-grey lock o' age, an' the manly
curls o' youth wavin' at my side that day!--But where are they now? A'
mouled! a' mouled!--But the druckit blood winna let them rot! I'll see
them rise fresh an' bonny! I'll look round to my right hand and ane will
sae, 'Mother! my dear mother, are you here with us?' I'll turn to my
left hand, another will say, 'Nanny! my dear and faithful wife, are you
too here with us?'--I'll say, 'Ay, John, I'm here; I was yours in life;
I have been yours in death; an' I'll be yours in life again.'--Dear
bairn, dear bairn, are you there," continued she, observing Katharine
standing close behind her; "what was I saying, or where was I at? I
little wat outher what I was saying or doing.--Hout ay; I was gaun ower
some auld things, but they're a' like a dream, an' when I get amang them
I'm hardly mysel. Dear bairn, ye maunna mind an auld crazy body's
reveries."

There was some need for this apology, if Nanny's frame, air, and
attitude, are taken into account. She was standing with her back to the
light, mixing meal with water, whereof to make bread--her mutch, or
_night-hussing_, as she called it, was tied close down over her cheeks
and brow as usual; her grey locks hanging dishevelled from under it; and
as she uttered the last sentence, immediately before noticing her young
mistress, her thin mealy hands were stretched upwards, her head and
body bent back, and her voice like one in a paroxysm. Katharine quaked,
although well accustomed to scenes of no ordinary nature.

"Nanny," said she, "there is something that preys upon your mind--some
great calamity that recurs to your memory, and goes near to unhinge your
tranquillity of mind, if not your reason. Will you inform me of it, good
Nanny, that I may talk and sympathize with you over it?"

"Dear bairn, nae loss ava--A' profit! a' profit i'the main! I haena
biggit a bield o' the windlestrae, nor lippened my weight to a broken
reed! Na, na, dear bairn; nae loss ava."

"But, Nanny, I have overheard you in your most secret hours, in your
prayers and self-examinations."

At the mention of this Nanny turned about, and after a wild searching
stare in her young mistress's face, while every nerve of her frame
seemed to shrink from the recollection of the disclosures she feared
she had made, she answered as follows, in a deep and tremulous tone:--

"That was atween God and me--There was neither language nor sound there
for the ear o' flesh!--It was unfair!--It was unfair!--Ye are mistress
here, and ye keep the keys o' the aumbry, the kitchen, the ha', an' the
hale house; but wi' the secret keys o' the heart and conscience ye hae
naething to do!--the keys o' the sma'est portal that leads to heaven or
hell are nane o' yours; therefore, what ye hae done was unfair. If I
chose, sinful and miserable as I am, to converse with my God about the
dead as if they war living, an' of the living as if they war dead,
what's that to you? Or if I likit to take counsel of that which
exists only in my own mind, is the rackle hand o' steelrife power
to make a handle o' that to grind the very hearts of the just and the
good, or turn the poor wasted frame o' eild and resignation on the
wheel?--Lack-a-day, my dear bairn, I'm lost again! Ye canna an' ye
maunna forgie me now. Walth's dear, an' life's dearer--but sin' it maun
be sae, twal o'clock sanna find me aneath your roof--there shall naebody
suffer for harbouring poor auld Nanny--she has seen better days, an' she
hopes to see better anes again; but it's lang sin' the warld's weel an'
the warld's wae came baith to her alike. I maun e'en bid ye fareweel, my
bonny bairn, but I maun tell ye ere I gae that ye're i'the _braid way_.
Ye hae some good things about ye, and O, it is a pity that a dear sweet
soul should be lost for want o' light to direct! How can a dear bairn
find the right way wi' its een tied up? But I maun haud my tongue an'
leave ye--I wad fain greet, but I hae lost the gate o't, for the
fountain-head has been lang run dry--Weel, weel--it's a' ower!--nae mair
about it--How's this the auld sang gaes?

    When the well runs dry then the rain is nigh,
      The heavens o' earth maun borrow,
    An' the streams that stray thro' the wastes the day,
      May sail aboon the morrow.

    Then dinna mourn, my bonny bird,
      I downa bide to hear ye;
    The storm may blaw, and the rain may fa',
      But nouther sal come near ye.

    O dinna weep for the day that's gane,
      Nor on the present ponder,
    For thou shalt sing on the laverock's wing,
      An' far away beyond her."

This Nanny sung to an air so soothing, and at the same time so
melancholy, it was impossible to listen to her unaffected, especially as
she herself was peculiarly so--a beam of wild delight glanced in her
eye, but it was like the joy of grief, (if one may be allowed the
expression,) if not actually the joy of madness. Nothing could be more
interesting than her character was now to the bewildered Katharine--it
arose to her eyes, and grew on her mind like a vision. She had been led
previously to regard her as having been crazed from her birth, and her
songs and chaunts to be mere ravings of fancy, strung in rhymes to suit
favourite airs, or old scraps of ballads void of meaning, that she had
learned in her youth. But there was a wild elegance at times in her
manner of thinking and expression--a dash of sublimity that was
inconsistent with such an idea. "Is it possible," (thus reasoned the
maiden with herself,) "that this demeanour can be the effect of great
worldly trouble and loss?--Perhaps she is bereft of all those who were
near and dear to her in life--is left alone as it were in this world,
and has lost a relish for all its concerns, while her whole hope, heart,
and mind, is fixed on a home above, to which all her thoughts, dreams,
and even her ravings insensibly turn, and to which the very songs and
chaunts of her youthful days are modelled anew. If such is really her
case, how I could sympathize with her in all her feelings!"

"Nanny," said she, "how wofully you misapprehend me; I came to exchange
burdens of heart and conscience with you--to confide in you, and love
you: Why will not you do the same with me, and tell me what loss it is
that you seem to bewail night and day, and what affecting theme it is
that thus puts you beside yourself?--If I judge not far amiss, the
knowledge of this is of greater import to my peace than aught in the
world beside, and will lead to a secret from me that deeply concerns us
both."

Nanny's suspicions were aroused, not laid, by this speech; she eyed her
young mistress steadfastly for a while, smiled, and shook her head.

"Sae young, sae bonny, and yet sae cunning!" said she. "Judas coudna
hae sic a face, but he had nouther a fairer tongue nor a fauser
heart!--A secret frae you, dear bairn! what secret can come frae you,
but some bit waefu' love story, enough to mak the pinks an' the ewe
gowans blush to the very lip? My heart's wae for ye, ae way an' a' ways;
but its a part of your curse--woman sinned an' woman maun suffer--her
hale life is but a succession o' shame, degradation, and suffering, frae
her cradle till her grave."

Katharine was dumb for a space, for reasoning with Nanny was out of the
question.

"You may one day rue this misprision of my motives, Nanny," rejoined
she; "in the mean time, I am obliged to leave home, on an express that
concerns my father's life and fortune; be careful of my mother until my
return, and of every thing about the house, for the charge of all must
devolve for a space on you."

"That I will, dear bairn--the thing that Nanny has ta'en in hand sanna
be neglected, if her twa hands can do it, and her auld crazed head
comprehend it."

"But, first, tell me, and tell me seriously, Nanny, are you subject to
any apprehension or terror on account of spirits?"

"Nae mair feared for them than I am for you, an' no half sae muckle, wi'
your leave.--Spirits, quoth I!

    Little misters it to me
    Whar they gang, or whar they ride;
    Round the hillock, on the lea,
    Round the auld borral tree,
    Or bourock by the burn side;
    Deep within the bogle-howe,
    Wi' his haffats in a lowe,
    Wons the waefu' wirricowe.

"Ah! noble Cleland! it is like his wayward freaks an' whimsies! Did ye
never hear it, you that speaks about spirits as they war your door
neighbours? It's a clever thing; his sister sung it; I think, it rins
this gate--hum! but then the dilogue comes in, and it is sae kamshachle
I canna word it, though I canna say it's misleared either."

"Dear Nanny, that is far from my question. You say you are nothing
afraid of spirits?"

"An' why should I? If they be good spirits, they will do me nae ill;
and if they be evil spirits, they hae nae power here. Thinkna ye that He
that takes care o' me throughout the day, is as able to do it by night?
Na, na, dear bairn, I hae contendit wi' the warst o' a' spirits face to
face, hand to hand, and breast to breast; ay, an' for a' his power, an'
a' his might, I dang him; and packed him off baffled and shamed!--Little
reason hae I to be feared for ony o' his black emissaries."

"Should one appear to you bodily, would you be nothing distracted or
frightened?"

"In my own strength I could not stand it, but yet I would stand it."

"That gives me joy--Then, Nanny, list to me: You will assuredly see one
in my absence; and you must take good heed to my directions, and act
precisely as I bid you."

Nanny gave up her work, and listened in suspense. "Then it is a' true
that the fock says!" said she, with a long-drawn sigh. "His presence be
about us!"

"How sensibly you spoke just now! Where is your faith fled already? I
tell you there will one appear to you every night in my absence,
precisely on the first crowing of the cock, about an hour after
midnight, and you must give him every thing that he asks, else it may
fare the worse with you, and all about the house."

Nanny's limbs were unable to support her weight--they trembled under
her. She sat down on a form, leaned her brow upon both hands, and
recited the 63d Psalm from beginning to end in a fervent tone.

"I wasna prepared for this," said she. "I fear, though my faith may
stand it, my wits will not. Dear, dear bairn, is there nae way to get
aff frae sic a trial?"

"There is only one, which is fraught with danger of another sort; but
were I sure that I could trust you with it, all might be well, and you
would rest free from any intercourse with that unearthly visitant, of
whom it seems you are so much in terror."

"For my own sake ye may trust me there: Ony thing but a bogle face to
face at midnight, an' me a' my lane. It is right wonderfu', though I ken
I'll soon be in a warld o' spirits, an' that I maun mingle an' mool wi'
them for ages, how the nature within me revolts at a' communion wi' them
here. Dear bairn, gie me your other plan, an' trust me for my own sake."

"It is this--but if you adopt it, for your life an' soul let no one in
this place know of it but yourself:--It is to admit one or two of the
fugitive whigs,--these people that skulk and pray about the mountains,
privily into the house every night, until my return. If you will give me
any test of your secrecy and truth, I will find ways and means of
bringing them to you, which will effectually bar all intrusion of bogle
or Brownie on your quiet; or should any such dare to appear, they will
deal with it themselves."

"An' _can_ the presence o' ane o' _them_ do this?" said Nanny, starting
up and speaking in a loud eldrich voice. "Then Heaven and hell
acknowledges it, an' the earth maun soon do the same! I knew it!--I knew
it!--I knew it!--ha, ha, ha, I knew it!--Ah! John, thou art safe!--Ay!
an' mae than thee; an' there will be mae yet! It is but a day! an' dark
an' dismal though it be, the change will be the sweeter! Blessed,
blessed be the day! None can say of thee that thou died like a fool, for
thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters." Then turning
close round to Katharine, with an expression of countenance quite
indescribable, she added in a quick maddened manner,--"Eh? Thou seekest
a test of me, dost thou? Can blood do it?--Can martyrdom do it?--Can
bonds, wounds, tortures, and mockery do it?--Can death itself do it? All
these have I suffered for that cause _in this same body_; mark that; for
there is but one half of my bone and my flesh here. But words are
nothing to the misbelieving--mere air mouthed into a sound. Look at this
for a test of _my_ sincerity and truth." So saying, she gave her hand a
wild brandish in the air, darted it at her throat, and snapping the tie
of her cap that she had always worn over her face, she snatched it off,
and turning her cheek round to her young mistress, added, "Look there
for your test, and if that is not enough, I will give you more!"

Katharine was struck dumb with astonishment and horror. She saw that
her ears were cut out close to the skull, and a C. R. indented on
her cheek with a hot iron, as deep as the jaw-bone. She burst out a
crying--clasped the old enthusiast in her arms--kissed the wound and
steeped it with her tears, and without one further remark, led her away
to the Old Room, that they might converse without interruption.

The sequel of this disclosure turned not out as desired; but this we
must leave by the way, until we overtake it in the regular course of the
narrative.




CHAPTER XII.


As soon as her father's letter was put into her hands, Katharine sent
off one of her brothers to Muchrah, to warn old John and his son to come
instantly to Chapelhope. They both arrived while she and Nanny were
consulting in the Old Room. She told them of her father's letter, of the
jeopardy he was in, and of her intended application to Drummelzier
without loss of time. "One of you," said she, "must accompany me; and I
sent for you both, to learn which could, with least inconvenience, be
wanted from your flocks."

"As for me," said John, "it's out o' the question to _think_ about me
winning away. The ewes wad gang wi' the bit hog-fence o' the Quave Brae,
stoup and roup. What wi' ghaists, brownies, dead men, an' ae mischief
an' other, it is maistly gane already; an' what's to come o' the poor
bits o' plottin baggits a' winter, is mair nor I can tell. They may pike
the woo aff ane another for aught that I see."

Katharine was grieved to hear this remonstrance, for she was desirous of
having old John as a guide and protector, who well knew the way, and was
besides singular for strength and courage, if kept among beings of this
world. She represented to him that the hog-fence of the Quave-Brae,
could not possibly be of equal importance with his master's life, nor
yet with the loss of his whole stock, both of sheep and cattle, which
might be confiscated, if prompt measures were not adopted. Nothing,
however, could persuade John, that ought could be of equal importance to
him with that which he had the charge of, and on which his heart and
attention were so much set both by day and night. He said he had lost
his lugs, and been brunt wi' the king's birn, for the hog-fence of the
Quave-Brae; and when he coudna get away to the prison at Edinburgh for
fear o't, but suffered sae muckle in place o' that, how could he win
away a' the gate to Dunse Castle?

Jasper liked not the journey more than he; for being convinced of
Katharine's power over spirits, he was very jealous of her taking undue
advantages of him, but he was obliged to submit. He refused a horse,
saying "it would only taigle him, but if she suffered him to gang on his
feet, if he was hindmost at Dunse, he should gie her leave to cut the
lugs out o' his head too, and then he wad hae the thief's mark on him
like his father."

Away they went; she riding on a stout shaggy poney, and Jasper running
before her barefoot, but with his _hose and shoon_ bound over his
shoulder. He took the straight line for Dunse, over hill and dale, as a
shepherd always does, who hates the _wimples_, as he calls them, of a
turnpike. He took such a line as an eagle would take, or a flock of
wild geese journeying from the one side of the country to the other,
never once reflecting on the inconvenience of riding on such a road. Of
course, it was impossible his young mistress could keep up with
him--indeed she had often enough to do in keeping sight of him. They met
with some curious adventures by the way, particularly one near
Thirlestane castle on Leader, with some stragglers of a troop of
soldiers. But these things we must hurry over as extraneous matter,
having nothing more to do with them than as connected with the thread of
our tale. They slept that night at a farm-house in Lammermoor, which
belonged to Drummelzier, and next day by noon arrived at Dunse Castle.

Drummelzier, being one of the Committee of Public Safety, was absent
from home, to which he did not return for several days, to the great
perplexity of Katharine, who was in the utmost distress about her
father, as well as her affairs at home. She was obliged, however, to
wait with patience, as no one knew in what part of the country he was.
The housekeeper, who was an Englishwoman, was kind to her, and bade her
not be afraid, for that their master had much more power with the
government than Claverhouse, the one being a moving spring, and the
other only a tool.

Drummelzier was a bold and determined royalist--was, indeed, in high
trust with the Privy-council, and had it in his power to have harassed
the country as much, and more, than the greater part of those who did
so; but, fortunately for that south-east division of Scotland, he was a
gentleman of high honour, benevolence, and suavity of manners, and
detested any act of injustice or oppression. He by these means
contributed materially to the keeping of a large division of Scotland
(though as whiggishly inclined as any part of it, Ayrshire perhaps
excepted,) in perfect peace. The very first dash that Clavers made among
the Covenanters, while he was as yet only a captain of a company, was
into this division of the country over which Drummelzier was appointed
to keep an eye, and it was in consequence of his intrepid and decided
behaviour there, that the Duke of York interested himself in his behalf,
and procured him the command of a troop of horse. At a place called
Bewly, on the confines of Roxburghshire, he surprised a large
conventicle about eleven o'clock on a Sabbath morning. Having but a
small band, as soon as he appeared a crowd of the hearers gathered round
the preacher to defend him, or to further his escape. Clavers burst in
upon them like a torrent; killed and wounded upwards of an hundred; took
the preacher prisoner, and all such of the hearers as were the most
respectable in appearance. He would have detained many more had his
force been sufficient for his designs, for that very day, about five
o'clock in the afternoon, he surprised another numerous conventicle, at
a place called Helmburn-Linn, in Selkirkshire, where he acted over the
same scene that he had done in the morning. The people, it is true, did
not get time to rally round their pastor as at the former place, for the
first intelligence they had of his approach was from a volley of
musketry among them from the top of the linn, which took too sure
effect.

The congregation scattered in a moment; and as there were strong
fastnesses near at hand, none were taken prisoners, save some old men,
and a number of ladies; unfortunately all these were ladies of
distinction: the preacher likewise was taken, who suffered afterwards.
The soldiers related of this man, that when they came upon the crowd,
and fired among them, he was in the middle of his afternoon prayer, and
all the people standing uncovered around him; and that for all the
shots, and the people flying and falling dead about him, he never so
much as paused, nor took down his hands, nor even opened his eyes, but
concluded a sentence in the same fervent tone, after they had dragged
him from the tent.

At one or other of these unfortunate conventicles, a part of all the
chief families of the Pringles, such as Torwoodlee, Whitebank,
Fairnilie, and others, were taken prisoners; as well as some of the
Scotts of Harden, and the Douglasses of Cavers and Boonjeddart; rich
prizes for Clavers, who bore them all in triumph prisoners to Edinburgh.

Drummelzier put his whole interest to the stretch to get these leading
and respectable families freed from such a disagreeable dilemma, and
succeeded in getting the greater part of them set at liberty, on giving
securities. From that time forth, there existed a secret jealousy
between him and Clavers; but as their jurisdiction lay on different
sides of the country, they had no further interference with one another.

When Katharine informed him, that his farmer, whom he so much esteemed,
was taken away a prisoner, and by whom, he bit his lip, shook his head,
and seemed highly incensed. He then questioned her about all the
charges against him, and the evidence; requesting her, at the same time,
to tell him the truth, in all its bearings, to the most minute scruple;
and when he had heard all, he said, that his lordship had other motives
for this capture besides these. He lost no time in setting about the
most coercive measures he could think of, to procure his liberty. He
sent an express to the Privy-council, and wrote to sundry other
gentlemen, whom Katharine knew nothing of; but the destination of Walter
being utterly unknown to either of them, the laird was at a loss how to
proceed.

He gave her, moreover, a bond of security, signed with his name, and
without a direction, to a great amount, for her father's appearance at
any court, to answer such charges as were brought against him; and with
this she was to haste to the place where her father was a prisoner, and
present it to the sheriff of the county, or chief magistrate of the
burgh of such place, unless it was at Edinburgh, and in that case she
was to take no farther care or concern about him.

She hasted home with her wild guide, where she arrived the fourth or
fifth day after her departure; and found, to her astonishment, the
Chapelhope deserted by man, woman, and boy! Not a living creature
remained about the steading, but her father's dog and some poultry! The
doors were locked, and the key away; and, hungry and fatigued as she
was, she could find no means of admittance. At length, on looking about,
she perceived that the cows were not about the house, nor any where in
the corn, and concluding that some one must be herding them, she went up
the side of the lake to their wonted walk, and found her two brothers
attending the cattle.

They told her that the _town_ (so they always denominate a farm-steading
in that district,) had been so grievously haunted in her absence, both
by Brownie and a ghost, that they were all obliged to leave it; that
their mother was gone all the way to Gilmanscleuch to her brother, to
remain there until she saw what became of her husband; Mass John was
taken away by the fairies; and old Nanny was at Riskinhope, where they
were also residing and sleeping at night; that the keys of the house
were to be had there, but nothing would induce Nanny to come back again
to Chapelhope, or at least to remain another night under its roof.

One mischief came thus upon poor Katharine after another; and she was
utterly unable to account for this piece of intelligence, having been
satisfied when she went away, that she had put every thing in train to
secure peace and order about the house, until her return. She rode to
Riskinhope for the key, but not one would accompany her home, poor Nanny
being lying moaning upon a bed. Jasper sat on the side of the hill, at a
convenient distance from the house, until her return; but then took her
horse from her, and put it away to the rest, refusing to enter the
door. Thus was she left in her father's house all alone. Nanny came
over, and assisted her in milking the kine evening and morning; and she
remained the rest of the day, and every night, by herself, neither did
she press any one much to bear her company. She had no one to send in
search of her father, and deliver Drummelzier's bond, at least none that
any one knew of, yet it was sent, and that speedily, although to little
purpose; for though Walter was sent to Dumfries Jail, he remained there
but two nights; a party of prisoners, of ten men and two women, being
ordered for Edinburgh, under a guard of soldiers, he was mixed
indiscriminately with the rest, and sent there along with them.

He always said, that though he was disposed to think well of Clavers
before he saw him, yet he never was so blithe in his life as when he got
from under his jurisdiction; for there was an appearance of ferocity and
wantonness of cruelty in all his proceedings, during the time that he
rode in his train a prisoner, that made the heart of any man, not
brutified by inurement to such scenes, revolt at the principles that
induced, as well as the government that warranted them. He saw him and
his troopers gather the whole vale of Annandale, as a shepherd gathers
his sheep in droves, pricking the inhabitants with their swords to urge
their speed. When he got thus all the people of a parish, or division of
a parish, driven together, he surrounded them with his soldiers, made
them kneel by dozens, and take the oath of abjuration, as well as one
acknowledging James Duke of York their rightful lord and sovereign; and
lastly, made them renounce their right and part in Heaven, if ever they
repented them of that oath. The first man of such a group, who refused
or objected to compliance with this dreadful measure, he took him
forthwith behind the ranks and shot him, which summary way of proceeding
generally induced all the people to comply. Moreover, the way in which
he threatened and maltreated children, and mocked and insulted women,
not to mention more brutal usage of them, proved him at once to be
destitute of the behaviour and feelings becoming a man, far less those
of a gentleman. He seemed to regard all the commonalty in the south and
west of Scotland as things to be mocked and insulted at pleasure, as
beings created only for the sport of him and his soldiers, while their
mental and bodily agonies were his delight. The narrator of this tale
confesses that he has taken this account of his raid through the vales
of Esk and Annan solely from tradition, as well as the attack made on
the two conventicles, where the Pringles, &c. were taken prisoners; but
these traditions are descended from such a source, and by such a line,
as amounts with him to veracity.

Far different were Walter's feelings on parting with the commander of
his guard, Serjeant Daniel Roy Macpherson, a noble block from the
genuine quarry of nature--rude as it was taken thence, without the mark
of hammer or chisel. When he heard that his prisoner was to be taken
from under his charge, he made up to him when out of the eye of his
commander, and treated him with a parting speech; which, on account of
its singularity, is here preserved, though, doubtless, woefully garbled
by being handed from one southland generation to another.

"Now he'll pe tahaking you away from mhe pefore as it were yesterdhay;
and he'll pe putting you into some vhile dark hole with all te low tamn
pwigs that come from te hills of Gallochee and Drummochloonrich, which
is a shame and a disgrhace to shut up a shentleman who is chief of a
clan among such poor crhazy maniachs, who will pe filling your ears full
of their rejoicings in spirit; and of Haiven! and Haiven! just as if
they were all going to Haiven! Cot t--n, do they suppose that Haiven is
to pe filled full of such poor insignaificant crheatures as they? or
that Cot is not a shentleman, that he would pe falling into such
cohmpany? But I'll pe giving you advice as a friend and prhother; when
you come pefore the couhnsel, or any of their commissioners, do not you
pe talking of Haiven, and Haiven, and of conscience and covenants. And
do not you pe pragging and poasting of one to pe your chief, or to pe of
a clan that has not a friend at court; but tell them your own clan, and
your claims to be its chief; and if you do not know her true descent,
you had better claim Macpherson; she pe as ould and as honourable a clan
as any of them all, and more."

Walter said, he trusted still to the proofs of his own loyalty, and the
want of evidence to the contrary.

"Pooh! pooh! Cot tamn!" said Macpherson; "I tell you the evidence you
want is this, if any great man say you ought to live, you will live; if
not, you will die. Did not I was telling you that the soholdiers that
were found dead in the correi, on the lands that belong to yourself, was
evidence enough and more; I would not pe giving _a curse_ for _your_
evidence after that, for the one is much petter than te other. And py
Cot, it is very well thought!" continued he, smiling grimly, "if you
will pe preaking out into a rage, and pe cursing and tamning them all,
you will get free in one moment."

Walter said, that would be an easy ransom, and though it was an error he
was too apt to fall into when angry, he could see no effect it could
have in this case, but to irritate his prosecutors more and more against
him.

"You see no effect! Cot t--n, if you ever can see any effect peyond the
top that is on your nose! and you will not pe advised by a man of
experience, who would do more for you than he would pe commending of;
and if you trust to what you can see, you will pe dancing a beautiful
Highland shig in the air to a saulm tune, and that will have a very good
effect. I tell you, when you come again to be questioned, I know my Lord
Dundee is to be there to pe adducing his proof; take you great and proud
offence at some of their questions and their proofs; and you may pe
making offer to fight them all one by one, or two by two, in the king's
name, and send them all to hell in one pody; you cannot pe tamning them
too much sore. By the soul of Rory More Macpherson! I would almost give
up this claymore to be by and see that effect. Now you are not to pe
minding because I am laughing like a fool, for I'm perfectly serious; if
matters should pe standing hard with you, think of the advice of an ould
friend, who respects you as the chief of the clan MacLeadle, supposing
it to pe as low, and as much fallen down as it may.--Farewell! she pe
giving you her hearty Cot's blessing."

Thus parted he with Daniel Roy Macpherson, and, as he judged, an
unfortunate change it was for him. The wretch who now took the command
of their guard had all the ignorance and rudeness of the former, without
any counterbalance of high feeling and honour like him. His name was
Patie Ingles, a temporary officer, the same who cut off the head of the
amiable Mr White with an axe, at Kilmarnock, carried it to New-mills,
and gave it to his party to play a game with at foot-ball, which they
did. Ingles was drunk during the greater part of the journey, and his
whole delight was in hurting, mortifying, and mimicking his prisoners.
They were all bound together in pairs, and driven on in that manner like
coupled dogs. This was effected by a very simple process. Their hands
were fastened behind, the right and left arm of each pair being linked
within one another. Walter was tied to a little spare Galloway weaver, a
man wholly prone to controversy--he wanted to argue every point--on
which account he was committed. Yet, when among the Cameronians, he took
their principles as severely to task as he did those of the other party
when examined by them. He lived but to contradict. Often did he try
Walter with different points of opinion regarding the Christian Church.
Walter knew so little about them that the weaver was astonished. He
tried him with the apologetical declaration. Walter had never heard of
it. He could make nothing of his gigantic associate, and at length began
a sly enquiry on what account he was committed; but even on that he
received no satisfactory information.

Ingles came staggering up with them. "Weel, Master Skinflint, what say
you to it the day? This is a pleasant journey, is it not? Eh?--I say,
Master, what do they call you! Peal-an'-eat, answer me in this--you
see--I say--Is it not delightful? Eh?"

"Certainly, sir," said the weaver, who wished to be quit of him; "very
delightful to those who feel it so."

"_Feel_ it so!--D--n you, sirrah, what do you mean by that? Do you know
who you are speaking to? Eh?--Answer me in this--What do you mean by
_Feel it so_? Eh?"

"I meant nothing," returned the weaver, somewhat snappishly, "but that
kind of respect which I always pay to gentry like you."

"Gentry like me!--D--n you, sir, if you speak such a--Eh?--Gentry like
me!--I'll spit you like a cock pheasant--Eh? Have you any of them in
Galloway? Answer me in this, will you? Eh?"

"I'll answer any reasonable thing, sir," said the poor weaver.

"Hout! never head the creature, man," said Walter; "it's a poor drunken
senseless beast of a thing."

Ingles fixed his reeling unsteady eyes upon him, filled with drunken
rage--walked on, spitting and looking across the way for a considerable
space--"What the devil of a whig camel is this?" said he, crossing over
to Walter's side. "Drunken senseless beast of a thing! Holm, did you
hear that?--Macwhinny, did you?--Eh? I'll scorn to shoot the cusser,
though I could do it--Eh? But I'll kick him like a dog--Eh?--Take that,
and that, will you? Eh?" And so saying, he kicked our proud-hearted and
independant Goodman of Chapelhope with his plebeian foot, staggering
backward each time he struck.

Walter's spirit could not brook this; and disregardful of all
consequences, he wheeled about with his face toward him, dragging the
weaver round with a jerk, as a mastiff sometimes does a spaniel that is
coupled to him; and, as Ingles threw up his foot to kick him on the
belly, he followed up his heel with his foot, giving him such a fling
upwards as made him whirl round in the air like a reel. He fell on his
back, and lay motionless; on which, several of the party of soldiers
levelled their muskets at Walter. "Ay, shoot," said he, setting up his
boardly breast to them--"Shoot at me if you dare, the best o' ye."

The soldiers cocked their pieces.

"Your Colonel himsel durstna wrang a hair o' my head, though fain he
wad hae done sae, without first gieing me ower to his betters--Let me
see if a scullion amang ye a' dare do mair than he."

The soldiers turned their eyes, waiting for the word of command; and the
weaver kept as far away from Walter as the nature of his bonds would let
him. The command of the party now devolved on a Serjeant Douglas; who,
perhaps nothing sorry for what had happened, stepped in between the
soldiers and prisoner, and swore a great oath, that "what the prisoner
said was the truth; and that all that it was their duty to do was, to
take the prisoners safe to Edinburgh, as at first ordered; and there
give their evidence of this transaction, which would send the lousy whig
to hell at once, provided there was any chance of his otherwise
escaping."

They lifted Ingles, and held him up into the air to get breath, loosing
meantime his cravat and clothes; on which he fell to vomit severely,
owing to the fall he had got, and the great quantity of spirits he had
drunk. They waited on him for about two hours; but as he still continued
unable either to speak or walk, they took him into a house called
Granton, and proceeded on their destination.

This Douglas, though apparently a superior person to the former
commander of the party, was still more intolerant and cruel than he.
There was no indignity or inconvenience that he could fasten on his
prisoners which he did not exercise to the utmost. They lodged that
night at a place called Tweedshaws; and Walter used always to relate an
occurrence that took place the next morning, that strongly marked the
character of this petty officer, as well as the licensed cruelty of the
times.

Some time previous to this, there had been a fellowship meeting, at a
place called Tallo-Lins, of the wanderers that lurked about Chapelhope
and the adjacent mountains. About eighty had assembled, merely to spend
the night in prayer, reading the Scriptures, &c. The curate of
Tweedsmuir, a poor dissolute wretch, sent a flaming account of this in
writing to the privy council, magnifying that simple affair to a great
and dangerous meeting of armed men. The council took the alarm, raised
the hue and cry, and offered a reward for the apprehending of any one
who had been at the meeting of Tallo-Lins. The curate, learning that a
party of the king's troops was lodged that night in his parish and
neighbourhood, came to Tweedshaws at a late hour, and requested to speak
with the captain of the party. He then informed Douglas of the meeting,
shewed him the council's letter and proclamation, and finally told him
that there was a man in a cottage hard by whom he strongly suspected to
have formed one at the meeting alluded to in the proclamation. There
being no conveniency for lodging so many people at Tweedshaws, Douglas
and the curate drank together all the night, as did the soldiers in
another party. A number of friends to the prisoners had given them money
when they left Dumfries for Edinburgh, to supply as well as they might
the privations to which they would be subjected; but here the military
took the greater part of it from them to supply their intemperance.
About the break of day, they went and surrounded a shepherd's cottage
belonging to the farm of Corehead, having been led thither by the
curate, where they found the shepherd an old man, his daughter, and one
Edward M'Cane, son to a merchant in Lanarkshire, who was courting this
shepherdess, a beautiful young maiden. The curate having got
intelligence that a stranger was at that house, immediately suspected
him to be one of the wanderers, and on this surmise the information was
given. The curate acknowledged the shepherd and his daughter as
parishioners, but of M'Cane, he said, he knew nothing, and had no doubt
that he was one of the rebellious whigs. They fell to examine the youth,
but they were all affected with the liquor they had drunk over night,
and made a mere farce of it, paying no regard to his answers, or, if
they did, it was merely to misconstrue or mock them. He denied having
been at the meeting at Tallo-Linns, and all acquaintance with the
individuals whom they named as having been there present. Finding that
they could make nothing of him whereon to ground a charge, Douglas made
them search him for arms; for being somewhat drunk, he took it highly
amiss that he should have been brought out of his way for nothing.
M'Cane judged himself safe on that score, for he knew that he had
neither knife, razor, bodkin, nor edged instrument of any kind about
him; but as ill luck would have it, he chanced to have an old gun-flint
in his waistcoat pocket. Douglas instantly pronounced this to be
sufficient, and ordered him to be shot. M'Cane was speechless for some
time with astonishment, and at length told his errand, and the footing
on which he stood with the young girl before them, offering at the same
time to bring proofs from his own parish of his loyalty and conformity.
He even condescended to kneel to the ruffian, to clasp his knees, and
beg and beseech of him to be allowed time for a regular proof; but
nothing would move him. He said, the courtship was a very clever excuse,
but would not do with him, and forthwith ordered him to be shot. He
would not even allow him to sing a psalm with his two friends, but
cursed and swore that the devil a psalm he should sing there. He said,
"It would not be singing a few verses of a psalm in a wretched and
miserable style that would keep him out of hell; and if he went to
heaven, he might then lilt as much at psalm-singing as he had a mind."
When the girl, his betrothed sweet-heart, saw the muskets levelled at
her lover, she broke through the file, shrieking most piteously, threw
herself on him, clasped his neck and kissed him, crying, like one
distracted, "O Edward, take me wi' ye--take me wi' ye; a' the warld
sanna part us."

"Ah! Mary," said he, "last night we looked forward to long and happy
years--how joyful were our hopes! but they are all blasted at once. Be
comforted, my dearest, dearest heart!--God bless you!--Farewell
forever."

The soldiers then dragged her backward, mocking her with indelicate
remarks, and while she was yet scarcely two paces removed, and still
stretching out her hands towards him, six balls were lodged in his heart
in a moment, and he fell dead at her feet. Deformed and bloody as he
was, she pressed the corpse to her bosom, moaning and sobbing in such a
way as if every throb would have been her last, and in that condition
the soldiers marched merrily off and left them. For this doughty and
noble deed, for which Serjeant Douglas deserved to have been hanged and
quartered, he shortly after got a cornetcy in Sir Thomas Livingston's
troop of horse.

Two of the prisoners made their escape that morning, owing to the
drunkenness of their guards, on which account the remainder being
blamed, were more haughtily and cruelly treated than ever. It is
necessary to mention all these, as they were afterwards canvassed at
Walter's trial, the account of which formed one of his winter evening
tales as long as he lived. Indeed, all such diffuse and miscellaneous
matter as is contained in this chapter, is a great incumbrance in the
right onward progress of a tale; but we have done with it, and shall now
haste to the end of our narrative in a direct uninterrupted line.




CHAPTER XII.


The sudden departure of Katharine from home, after the extraordinary
adventure of the curate Clerk in the Old Room, at the crowing of the
cock, was a great relief to him, as it freed him from the embarrassment
of her company, and gave him an opportunity of telling his own story to
the goodwife without interruption, of the success he had in freeing her
daughter from the power and fellowship of evil spirits. That story was
fitted admirably to suit her weak and superstitious mind; it accorded
with any thing nearer than the truth, and perhaps this finished
hypocrite never appeared so great a character in the eyes of Maron
Linton as he did that day. He spoke of going away to Henderland in the
evening, but she entreated him so earnestly to stay and protect her from
the power of the spirits that haunted the place, that he deemed it
proper to acquiesce, for without the countenance of the family of
Chapelhope he was nothing--he could not have lived in his puny cure. She
depended on him, she said, to rid the town of these audacious (or, as
she called them, _misleared_) beings altogether, for without his
interference the family would be ruined. Their servants had all left
them--the work remained unwrought, and every thing was going to
confusion--she had given Brownie his accustomed wages again and again,
and still he refused to leave the house; and without the holy man's
assistance in expelling him and his train, their prospects in life were
hopeless.

The curate promised to use his highest interest with Heaven, and assured
her that no further evil should come nigh unto her, at least while he
remained under her roof; "for were it not," said he, "for the
conjunction which they are in with one of the family, they should have
been expelled long ere now. That unnatural bond, I hope, by a course of
secret conferences, to be able to break asunder, but be not thou afraid,
for no evil shall come nigh thy dwelling." He talked with the goodwife
in the style that pleased her; flattered her high and pure notions of
religion, as well as her piety and benevolence; said evening prayers in
the family with zeal and devotion; but how was he startled when informed
that he was to sleep again in the Old Room! He indeed knew not that it
was haunted more than any other part of the house, or that it was the
favourite nightly resort of the Brownie of Bodsbeck, but the apparition
that he had seen, and the unaccountable rescue that he had witnessed the
night before, preyed on his mind, and he hinted to the goodwife, that he
had expected to be preferred to her daughter's room and bed that night,
as she was absent; but Maron, too, was selfish; for who is without that
great ruling motive? She expected that Brownie would appear; that Mass
John would speak to it; and thenceforward to be freed from its unwelcome
intrusions. To the Old Room he was shown at a late hour, where the lamp,
the Bible, and the _sand-glass_ were placed on the little table, at the
bed's head, as usual.

It was past eleven when the curate went to sleep. Old Nanny, who was
dressed more neatly than usual, sat still at the kitchen fire, expecting
every minute the two covenant-men, whom her young mistress had promised
to send to her privily, as her companions and protectors through the
dark and silent watches of the night until her return. Still nothing of
them appeared; but, confident that they would appear, she stirred the
embers of the fire, and continued to keep watch with patient anxiety.
When it drew towards midnight, as she judged, she heard a noise without,
as of some people entering, or trying to enter, by the outer door of
the Old Room. Concluding that it was her expected companions, and
alarmed at the wrong direction they had taken, she ran out, and round
the west end of the house, to warn them of their mistake, and bring them
in by the kitchen door. As she proceeded, she heard two or three loud
and half-stifled howls from the interior of the Old Room. The door was
shut, but, perceiving by the seam in the window-shutters that the light
within was still burning, she ran to the window, which directly faced
the curate's bed; and there being a small aperture broken in one of the
panes, she edged back the shutter, so as to see and hear the most part
of what was going on within. She saw four or five figures standing at
the bed, resembling human figures in some small degree--their backs
towards her; but she saw a half-face of one that held the lamp in its
hand, and it was of the hue of a smoked wall. In the midst of them stood
the deformed little Brownie, that has often been mentioned and
described in the foregoing part of this tale. In his right hand he
brandished a weapon, resembling a dirk or carving-knife. The other hand
he stretched out, half-raised over the curate's face, as if to command
attention. "Peace!" said he, "thou child of the bottomless pit, and
minister of unrighteousness; another such sound from these polluted lips
of thine, and I plunge this weapon into thy heart. We would shed thy
blood without any reluctance--nay, know thou that we would rejoice to do
it, as thereby we would render our master acceptable service. Not for
that intent or purpose are we now come; yet thy abominations shall not
altogether pass unpunished. Thou knowest thy own heart--its hypocrisy,
and licentiousness--Thou knowest, that last night, at this same hour,
thou didst attempt, by brutal force, to pollute the purest and most
angelic of the human race--we rescued her from thy hellish clutch, for
we are her servants, and attend upon her steps. Thou knowest, that still
thou art cherishing the hope of succeeding in thy cursed scheme. Thou
art a stain to thy profession, and a blot upon the cheek of nature,
enough to make thy race and thy nation stink in the nose of their
Creator!--To what thou deservest, thy doom is a lenient one--but it is
fixed and irrevocable!"

There was something in that mis-shapen creature's voice that chilled
Nanny's very soul while it spoke these words, especially its
pronunciation of some of them; it sounded like something she had heard
before, perhaps in a dream, but it was horrible, and not to be brooked.
The rest now laid violent hold of Mass John, and she heard him mumbling
in a supplicating voice, but knew not what he said. As they stooped
forward, the lamp shone on the floor, and she saw the appearance of a
coffin standing behind them. Nanny was astonished, but not yet overcome;
for, cruel were the scenes that she had beheld, and many the trials she
had undergone!--but at that instant the deformed and grizly being
turned round, as if looking for something that it wanted--the lamp shone
full on its face, the lineaments of which when Nanny beheld, her eyes at
once were darkened, and she saw no more that night. How she spent the
remainder of it, or by what means she got to her bed in the kitchen, she
never knew; but next morning when the goodwife and her sons arose, poor
old Nanny was lying in the kitchen bed delirious, and talking of
dreadful and incomprehensible things. All that could be gathered from
her frenzy was, that some terrible catastrophe had happened in the Old
Room, and that Clerk, the curate, was implicated in it. The goodwife,
judging that her favourite had been at war with the spirits, and that
Heaven had been of course triumphant, hasted to the Old Room to bless
and pay the honour due to such a divine character; she called his name
as she entered, but no one made answer; she hasted to the bed, but
behold there was no one there! The goodwife's sole spiritual guide had
vanished away.

The curate Clerk was never more seen nor heard of in these bounds; but
it may not be improper here to relate a circumstance that happened some
time thereafter, as it comes no more within the range of this story.

In the month of October, and the memorable year 1688, it is well known
that Clavers hasted southward, with all the troops under his command, to
assist King James against the Prince of Orange and the protestant party
of England, or to sell himself to the latter, any of the ways that he
found most convenient. In the course of this march, as he was resting
his troops at a place called Ninemile-brae, near the Border, a poor
emaciated and forlorn-looking wretch came to him, and desired to speak a
word with him. Mr Adam Copland and he were sitting together when this
happened; Clavers asked his name and his business, for none of the two
recognised him--It was Clerk, the curate (that had been) of Chapelhope
and Kirkhope! Clavers said, as there were none present save a friend, he
might say out his business. This he declined, and took Clavers a short
way aside. Copland watched their motions, but could not hear what Clerk
said. When he began to tell his story Clavers burst into a violent fit
of laughter, but soon restrained himself, and Copland beheld him
knitting his brows, and biting his lip, as he seldom failed to do when
angry. When they parted, he heard him saying distinctly, "It is
impossible that I can avenge your wrongs at this time, for I have
matters of great import before me; but the day may come ere long when it
will be in my power, and d--n me if I do not do it!"

The spirits of the wild having been victorious, and the reverend curate,
the goodwife's only stay, overcome and carried off bodily, she was
impatient, and on the rack every minute that she staid longer about the
house. She caused one of her sons take a horse, and conduct her to
Gilmanscleuch that night, to her brother Thomas's farm, determined no
more to see Chapelhope till her husband's return; and if that should
never take place, to bid it adieu for ever.

Nanny went to the led farm of Riskinhope, that being the nearest house
to Chapelhope, and just over against it, in order to take what care she
was able of the things about the house during the day. There also the
two boys remained, and herded throughout the day in a very indifferent
manner; and, in short, every thing about the farm was going fast to
confusion when Katharine returned from her mission to the Laird of
Drummelzier. Thus it was that she found her father's house deserted, its
doors locked up, and its hearth cold.

Her anxiety to converse privately with Nanny was great; but at her first
visit, when she went for the key, this was impossible without being
overheard. She soon, however, found an opportunity; for that night she
enticed her into the byre at Chapelhope, in the gloaming, after the kine
had left the lone, where a conversation took place between them in
effect as follows:

"Alas, Nanny! how has all this happened? Did not the two Covenanters,
for whom I sent, come to bear you company?"

"Dear bairn, if they did come I saw nae them. If they came, they were
ower late, for the spirits were there afore them; an' I hae seen sic a
sight! Dear, dear bairn, dinna gar me gang owre it again--I hae seen a
sight that's enough to turn the heart o' flesh to an iceshogle, an' to
freeze up the very springs o' life!--Dinna gar me gang ower it again,
an' rake up the ashes o' the honoured dead--But what need I say sae? The
dead are up already! Lord in Heaven be my shield and safeguard!"

"Nanny, you affright me; but, be assured, your terrors have originated
in some mistake--your sight has deceived you, and all shall yet be
explained to your satisfaction."

"Say nae sae, dear bairn; my sight hasna deceived me, yet I have been
deceived. The world has deceived me--hell has deceived me--and heaven
has winked at the deed. Alak, an' wae's me, that it should sae hae been
predestined afore the world began! The day was, an' no sae lang sin'
syne, when I could hae prayed wi' confidence, an' sung wi' joy; but now
my mind is overturned, and I hae nouther stay on earth, nor hope in
heaven! The veil of the Temple may be rent below, and the ark of the
testimony thrown open above, but _their_ forms will not be seen within
the one, nor their names found written in the other! We have been
counted as sheep for the slaughter; we have been killed all the day
long; yet hath the Lord forgotten to be gracious, and is his mercy clean
gone for ever!"

"Peace, peace, for Heaven's sake!--You are verging on blasphemy, and
know not what you say."

"Do the reprobate know what they say, or can they forbear? How
then can I? I, who am in the bond of iniquity, and the jaws of death
eternal?--Where can I fly? When the righteous are not saved, where shall
the ungodly and the sinner appear?--Ay, dear bairn, weel may ye stare
and raise up your hands that gate; but when ye hear my tale, ye winna
wonder that my poor wits are uprooted. Suppose sic a case your
ain--suppose you had been the bosom companion o' ane for twenty
years--had joined wi' him in devotion, e'ening and morning, for a' that
time, and had never heard a sigh but for sin, nor a complaint but of the
iniquities of the land--If ye had witnessed him follow two comely sons,
your own flesh and blood, to the scaffold, and bless his God who put it
in their hearts to stand and suffer for his cause, and for the crown of
martyrdom he had bestowed on them, and bury the mangled bodies of other
two with tears, but not with repining--If, after a' this, he had been
hunted as a partridge on the mountains, and for the same dear cause, the
simplicity of the truth as it is in Jesus, had laid down his life--If
you knew that his grey head was hung upon the city wall for a spectacle
to gaze at, and his trunk buried in the wild by strangers--Say you knew
all this, and had all these dear ties in your remembrance, and yet,
after long years of hope soon to join their blest society above, to see
again that loved and revered form stand before your eyes on earth at
midnight, shrivelled, pale, and deformed, and mixed with malevolent
spirits on dire and revengeful intent, where wad your hope--where wad
your confidence--or where wad your wits hae been flown?" Here she cried
bitterly; and seizing the astonished Katharine's hand with both hers,
and pressing it to her brow, she continued her impassioned and frantic
strain.--"Pity me, O dear bairn, pity me! For man hasna pitied me, an'
God hasna pitied me! I'm gaun down a floody water, down, down; an' I wad
fain grip at something, if it were but a swoomin strae, as a last hope,
or I sink a' thegither."

"These are the words of delirium," said Katharine, "and I will not set
them down as spoke by you. Pray the Almighty that they may never be
written in his book of remembrance against you; for the veriest
downfallen fiend can do no more than distrust the mercy of God in a
Redeemer. I tell you, woman, that whatever you may fancy you have seen
or heard in the darkness of night, when imagination forms fantasies of
its own, of all those who have stood for our civil and religious
liberties, who, for the sake of a good conscience, have yielded up all,
and sealed their testimony with their blood, not one hair of _their_
heads shall fall to the ground, for their names are written in the book
of life, and they shall shine as stars in the kingdom of their
Father. You have yourself suffered much, and have rejoiced in your
sufferings--So far you did well--Do not then mar so fair an eternal
harvest--so blest a prospect of a happy and everlasting community, by
the sin of despair, that can never be forgiven. Can you, for a moment,
while in possession of your right senses, doubt of the tender mercies of
your Maker and Preserver? Can you for a moment believe that he has hid
his face from the tears and the blood that have been shed for his cause
in Scotland? As well may you doubt that the earth bears or the sun warms
you, or that he never made a revelation of his will to man."

All the while that Katharine spoke thus, Nanny's eyes were fixed on her,
as if drinking every word she uttered into a soul that thirsted for it.
A wild and unstable light beamed on her countenance, but it was still
only like a sun-beam breaking through the storm, which is ready to be
swallowed up by the rolling darkness within. Her head shook as with a
slight paralytic affection, and she again clasped the hand which she had
never quitted.

"Are ye an angel o' light," said she, in a soft tremulous voice, "that
ye gar my heart prinkle sae wi' a joy that it never thought again to
taste? It isna then a strae nor a stibble that I hae grippit at for my
last hope, but the tap of a good tow-widdy saugh; an' a young sapling
though it be, it is steevely rootit in a good soil, an' will maybe help
the poor drowning wretch to the shore!--An' _hae_ I thought sae muckle
ill o' you? Could I deem that mild heavenly face, that's but the
reflection o' the soul within, the image o' sin and o' Satan, an' a veil
o' deceit thrawn ower a mind prone to wickedness? Forgie me, dear, dear
saint, forgie me! It surely canna be condemned spirits that ye are
connectit wi? Ah, ye're dumb there!--ye darna answer me to that! Na, na!
the spirits o' the just made perfect wad never leave their abodes o'
felicity to gabble amang derksome fiends at the dead hour o' the night,
in sic a world o' sin and sorrow as this. But I saw _him_, an' heard him
speak, as sure as I see your face an' hear the tones o' my ain voice;
an', if I lookit nae wrang, there were mae risen frae the dead than ane.
It is an awfu' dispensation to think o'! But there was a spirit o'
retaliation in him that often made me quake, though never sae as now. O
wad ye but tell me what kind o' spirits ye are in conjunction wi'?"

"None but the blest and the happy--None but they who have come out of
great tribulation, and washed their robes white in the blood of the
Lamb--None that would harbour such a thought, or utter such a doubt, as
you have done to-night, for the empire of the universe--More I may not
tell you at present; but stay you here with me, and I will cherish you,
and introduce you to these spirits, and you shall be happier with them
than ever you have been."

"Will I sae?--Say nae mair!--I wad pit hand to my ain life the night,
an' risk the warst or I again met wi' them face to face in the same
guise as I saw them at midnight last week. Ye're a wonderfu' creature!
But ye're ayont my depth; therefore I'll love ye, an' fear ye, an' keep
my distance."

Thus they parted: Katharine into her long vacant house, and Nanny over
to Riskinhope. The farmer of Riskinhope (David Bryden of Eldin-hope),
was ruined by the sequestration of his stock by Clavers, but the
shepherds and other servants still lingered about the house for better
or for worse. There was not a sheep on that large farm, save about five
scores of good ewes, that Davie Tait, the herd of Whithope, had turned
slyly over into the hags of the Yokeburn-head, that day the drivers took
away the stock. When Clavers made his last raid up by Chapelhope, all
the family of Riskinhope fled to the hills, and betook them to cover,
every one by himself; and there, with beating hearts, peeped through the
heath and the rash-bush, to watch the motions of that bloody persecutor.
Perilous was their case that day, for had any of them been found in that
situation, it would have been enough; but Davie well knew it was good
for him to keep out of the way, for Mr Renwick, and Mr Shields, as well
as other wanderers, had been sheltered in his house many a night, and
the latter wrote his _Hind let Loose_ in a small house at the side of
Winterhopeburn. Yet Davie was not a Cameronian, properly speaking, nor a
very religious man neither; but the religious enthusiasm of his guests
had broke him a little into their manner, and way of thinking. He had
learned to make family exercise, not however to very great purpose, for
the only thing very remarkable in it was the strong nasal Cameronian
whine of his prayer, and its pastoral allusions; but he was grown fond
of exhibiting in that line, having learned the Martyr's tune, and the
second part of the Dundee, which formed the whole range of his psalmody!
Yet Davie liked a joke as well as ever he did, and perhaps as well as
any part of divine worship. When one remarked to him that his family
music was loud enough, but very discordant,--"Ay," quoth Davie, "but
it's a lang gate atween here an' Heaven; a' music's good i' the
distance; I hae strong faith in that. I hae some hope i' Dan's bass too;
it has _great effect_. I was wantin him to tak some salts an' sinny leaf
to help it a wee."

That night after Nanny came over, Davie had prayed as usual, and among
other things, had not forgot the Brownie of Bodsbeck, that "he might be
skelpit wi' the taws o' divine wrath, an' sent back to hell wi' the
sperks on his hips; and that the angel of presence might keep watch over
their couches that night, to scare the howlaty face o' him away, an'
learn him to keep his ain side o' the water."

After prayers the family were crowded round the fading ingle, and
cracking of the Brownie and of Davie's prayer. Davie had opened his
waistcoat, and thrown off his hose to warm his feet, and, flattered
with their remarks on his abilities, began to be somewhat scurrilous on
Brownie. "I think I hae cowed him the night," said he; "he'll fash nane
o' us--he may stay wi' his Keatie Laidlaw yonder, an' rin at her biddin.
He has a sonsy weel-faur'd lass to bide wi'--he's better aff than some
o' his neighbours, Maysey;" and, saying so, he cast a look to his wife
that spoke unutterable things; but finding that his joke did not take,
after so serious a prayer, he turned again on Brownie, and, as his own
wife said, "didna leave him the likeness of a dog." He said he had eaten
sax bowes o' good meal to the goodman, an' a' that he had done for't,
that ony body kend o', was mending up an auld fail-dike round the corn
ae night. In short, he said he was an unprofitable guest--a dirty
droich, an' a menseless glutton--an' it was weak an' silly in ony true
Christian to be eiry for him. He had not said out the last words, when
they heard a whispering at the door, and shortly after these words
distinctly uttered:

    "There's neither blood nor rown-tree pin,
    At open doors the dogs go in."

The size of every eye's orbit was doubled in a moment, as it turned
towards the door. The light of the fire was shining bright along the
short entry between the beds, and they saw the appearance of a man,
clothed in black, come slowly and deliberately in, walk across the
entry, and go into the apartment in the other end of the house. The
family were all above one another in beyond the fire in an instant, and
struggling who to be undermost, and next the wall. Nanny, who was
sitting on the form beyond the fire, pondering on other matters, leaning
her brow on both hands, and all unconscious of what had entered, was
overborne in the crush, and laid flat undermost of all.

"Dear, dear bairns, what's asteer? Hout fy! Why, troth, ye'll crush the
poor auld body as braid as a blood-kercake."

"Ah! the Brownie!--the Brownie!--the Brownie o' Bodsbeck!" was whispered
in horror from every tongue.

Davie Tait luckily recollecting that there was a door at hand, that led
to a little milk-house in the other end of the house, and still another
division farther from Brownie, led the way to it on all four, at full
gallop, and took shelter in the farthest corner of that. All the rest
were soon above him, but Davie bore the oppressive weight with great
fortitude for some time, and without a murmur. Nanny was left last; she
kept hold of the Bible that she had in her lap when she fell, and had
likewise the precaution to light the lamp before she followed her
affrighted associates. Nothing could be more appalling than her own
entry after them--never was a figure more calculated to inspire terror,
than Nanny coming carrying a feeble glimmering lamp, that only served to
make darkness visible, while her pale raised-like features were bent
over it, eager to discover her rueful compeers. The lamp was
half-covered with her hand to keep it from being blown out; and her
face, where only a line of light here and there was visible, was
altogether horrible. Having discovered the situation, and the plight of
the family, she bolted the door behind her, and advanced slowly up to
them. "Dear bairns, what did ye see that has putten ye a' this gate?"

"Lord sauf us!" cried Davie, from below, "we hae forespoke the
Brownie--tak that elbow out o' my guts a wee bit. They say, if ye speak
o' the deil, he'll appear. 'Tis an unsonsy and dangerous thing to--Wha's
aught that knee? slack it a little. God guide us, sirs, there's the
weight of a mill-stane on aboon the links o' my neck. If the Lord hae
forsaken us, an' winna heed our prayers, we may gie up a' for tint
thegither!--Nanny, hae ye boltit the door."

"Ay hae I, firm an' fast."

"Than muve up a wee, sirs, or faith I'm gane--Hech-howe! the weight o'
sin an' mortality that's amang ye."

Davie's courage, that had begun to mount on hearing that the door was
bolted, soon gave way again, when he raised his head, and saw the utter
dismay that was painted on each countenance. "Hout, Maysey woman, dinna
just mak sic faces--ye are eneuch to fright fock, foreby aught else,"
said he to his wife.

"O Davie, think what a wheen poor helpless creatures we are!--Does
Brownie ever kill ony body?"

"I wish it be nae a waur thing than Brownie," said Dan.

"Waur than Brownie? Mercy on us!--Waur than Brownie!--What was it like?"
was whispered round.

"Ye mind poor Kirko, the bit Dinscore laird, that skulkit hereabouts sae
lang, an' sleepit several nights ben in that end?--Didna ye a' think it
was unco like him?"

"The very man!--the very man!--his make, his gang, his claes, an' every
thing," was echoed by all.

"An' ye ken," continued Dan, "that he was shot on Dumfries sands this
simmer. It is his ghaist come to haunt the place whar he baid, an'
prayed sae aften."

"Ower true! Ower true! it's awsome to think o'," was the general remark.

"Let us go to prayers," said Nanny: "it isna a time to creep into nooks
on aboon other, an' gie way to despair. There is but Ane that _can_
guard or protect us, let us apply there."

"Something has been done that way already," said Davie Tait; "we canna
come to handygrips wi' him, an' force him to stand senter at our door a'
night."

Davie's matter was exhausted on the subject, and he did not much relish
going over the same words again, which, he acknowledged, were _rather
kenspeckle_; nor yet to venture on composing new ones out of his own
head: this made him disposed to waive Nanny's proposal.

"Ay," answered she, "but we mauna haud just wi' saying gie us this, an'
gie us that; and than, because we dinna just get it aff loof, drap the
plea an' despair. Na, na, dear bairns, that's nae part o' the christian
warfare! we maun plead wi' humility, and plead again, an' never was
there mair cause for rousing to exertion than now. The times are
momentous, and some great change is drawing near, for the dead are
astir--I have seen them mysel'. Yes, the severed members that were
scattered, and buried apart, are come thegither again--joined, an' gaun
aboon the grund, mouthing the air o' Heaven. I saw it mysel--Can it be
that the resurrection is begun? It is a far away thought for the thing
itsel to be as near; but it's a glorious ane, an' there's proof o't. But
then the place an' the time are doubtfu'--had it been sun proof I wad
hae likit it better. We little wot what to say or think under sic
visitations. Let us apply to the only source of light and direction.
David, be you a mouth to us."

"A mouth?" said Davie; but recollecting himself, added--"Hum, I
understand you; but I hae mouthed mair already than has come to ony
good. I like fock to pray that hae some chance to be heard; some fock
may scraugh themsels hersh, and be nae the better."

"Oh fie, David! speak wi' some reverence," said his wife Maysey.

"I mintit at naething else," said he, "but I hae an unreverent kind o'
tongue that nought ever serous-like fa's frae, let my frame o' mind be
as it will; an' troth I haena command o' language for a job like this. I
trow the prelates hae the best way after a', for they get prayers ready
made to their hands, an' disna need to affront their Maker wi'
blunders."

"How can ye speak sae the night, David? or how can sic a thought hover
round your heart as to flee out at random that gate? If ye will _read_
prayers, there's a book, read them out o' that; if the words o' God
winna suit the cases o' his ain creatures, how can ye trow the words o'
another man can do it? But pray wi' the heart, an' pray in humility, and
fearna being accepted."

"That's true; but yet ane maks but a poor figure wi' the heart by
itsel."

"Wow, Davie, man," quoth Maysey, his wife, "an' ye mak but a poor figure
indeed, when we're a' in sic a plight! Ye hear the woman speaks gude
truth; an' ye ken yoursel ye fenced us against the Brownie afore, but no
against Kirky's ghaist; tak the beuk like a man, an' pit the fence o'
scripture faith round us for that too."

Stupid as Maysey was, she knew the way to her husband's heart. Davie
could not resist such an appeal--he took the Bible; sung the 143d psalm,
from beginning to end, at Nanny's request; and likewise, by her
direction, read the 20th of Revelations; then kneeling down on his bare
knees, legs, and feet, as he fled from the kitchen, on the damp miry
floor of the milk-house, he essayed a strong energetic prayer as a fence
against the invading ghost. But as Davie acknowledged, he had an
irreverend expression naturally, that no effort could overcome, (and by
the bye, there is more in this than mankind are in general aware of,)
and the more he aimed at sublimity, the more ludicrous he grew, even to
common ears. There is scarcely a boy in the country who cannot recite
scraps of Davie Tait's prayer; but were I to set all that is preserved
of it down here, it might be construed as a mockery of that holy
ordinance, than which nothing is so far from my heart or intention; but,
convinced as I am that a rude exhibition in such a divine solemnity is
of all things the most indecent and unbecoming, I think such should be
held up to ridicule, as a warning to all Christians never to ask
ignorance or absurdity to perform this sacred duty in public. The
sublime part of it therefore is given, which was meant as a fence
against the spirit that had set up his rest so near. To such as are not
acquainted with the pastoral terms, the meaning in some parts may be
equivocal; to those who are, the train of thinking will be obvious.--It
is part of a genuine prayer.

    "But the last time we gathered oursels before thee, we left out a
    wing o' the hirsel by mistake, an' thou hast paid us hame i' our
    ain coin. Thou wart sae gude than as come to the sheddin thysel,
    an' clap our heads, an' whisper i' our lugs, 'dinna be
    disheartened, my puir bits o' waefu' things, for though ye be the
    shotts o' my hale fauld, I'll take care o' ye, an' herd ye, an'
    gie ye a' that ye hae askit o' me the night.' It was kind, an'
    thou hast done it; but we forgot a principal part, an' maun tell
    thee now, that we have had another visitor sin' ye war here, an'
    ane wha's back we wad rather see than his face. Thou kens better
    thysel than we can tell thee what place he has made his escape
    frae; but we sair dread it is frae the boddomless pit, or he wadna
    hae ta'en possession but leave. Ye ken, that gang tried to keep
    vilent leasehaud o' your ain fields, an' your ain ha', till ye gae
    them a killicoup. If he be ane o' them, O come thysel to our help,
    an' bring in thy hand a bolt o' divine vengeance, het i' the
    furnace o' thy wrath as reed as a nailstring, an' bizz him an'
    scouder him till ye dinna leave him the likeness of a paper izel,
    until he be glad to creep into the worm-holes o' the earth, never
    to see sun or sterns mair. But, if it be some puir dumfoundered
    soul that has been bumbased and stoundit at the view o' the lang
    Hopes an' the Downfa's o' Eternity, comed daundering away frae
    about the laiggen girds o' Heaven to the waefu' gang that he left
    behind, like a lost sheep that strays frae the rich pastures o'
    the south, an' comes bleating back a' the gate to its cauld native
    hills, to the very gair where it was lambed and first followed
    its minny, ane canna help haeing a fellow-feeling wi' the puir
    soul after a', but yet he'll find himsel here like a cow in an
    unco loan. Therefore, O furnish him this night wi' the wings o'
    the wild gainner or the eagle, that he may swoof away back to a
    better hame than this, for we want nane o' his company. An' do
    thou give to the puir stray thing a weel-hained heff and a beildy
    lair, that he may nae mair come straggling amang a stock that's
    sae unlike himsel, that they're frightit at the very look o' him.

    "Thou hast promised in thy Word to be our shepherd, our guider
    an' director; an' thy word's as gude as some men's aith, an' we'll
    haud thee at it. Therefore take thy plaid about thee, thy staff in
    thy hand, an' thy dog at thy fit, an' gather us a' in frae the
    cauld windy knowes o' self-conceit--the plashy bogs an' mires o'
    sensuality, an' the damp flows o' worldly-mindedness, an' wyse us
    a' into the true bught o' life, made o' the flakes o' forgiveness
    and the door o' loving-kindness; an' never do thou suffer us to be
    heftit e'ening or morning, but gie lashin' meals o' the milk o'
    praise, the ream o' thankfu'ness, an' the butter o' good-works.
    An' do thou, in thy good time an' way, smear us ower the hale bouk
    wi' the tar o' adversity, weel mixed up wi' the meinging of
    repentance, that we may be kiver'd ower wi' gude bouzy shake-rough
    fleeces o' faith, a' run out on the hips, an' as brown as a tod.
    An' do thou, moreover, fauld us ower-night, an' every night, in
    within the true sheep-fauld o' thy covenant, weel buggen wi' the
    stanes o' salvation, an' caped wi' the divots o' grace. An' then
    wi' sic a shepherd, an' sic a sheep-fauld, what hae wi' to be
    feared for? Na, na! we'll fear naething but sin!--We'll never mair
    scare at the poolly-woolly o' the whaup, nor swirl at the gelloch
    o' the ern; for if the arm of our Shepherd be about us for good,
    a' the imps, an' a' the powers o' darkness, canna wrang a hair o'
    our tails."

All the family arose from their knees with altered looks. Thus fenced, a
new energy glowed in every breast. Poor Maysey, proud of her husband's
bold and sublime intercession, and trusting in the divine fence now
raised around them, rose with the tear in her eye, seized the lamp, and
led the way, followed by all the rest, to retake the apartment of
Kirky's ghost by open assault. Nanny, whose faith wont to be superior to
all these things, lagged behind, dreading to see the sight that she had
seen on the Saturday night before; and the bold intercessor himself kept
her company, on pretence of a sleeping leg; but, in truth, his faith in
his own intercession and fence did not mount very high. All the
apartment was searched--every chest, corner, and hole that could be
thought of--every thing was quiet, and not so much as a mouse
stirring!--not a bed-cover folded down, nor the smallest remembered
article missing! All the family saw Kirky's ghost enter in his own
likeness, and heard him speak in his wonted tongue, except old Nanny. It
was a great and wonderful victory gained. They were again in full
possession of their own house, a right which they never seemed before to
have duly appreciated. They felt grateful and happy; and it was hinted
by Maysey, Dan, and uncle Nicholas, that Davie Tait would turn out a
burning and a shining light in these dark and dismal times, and would
supersede Messrs Renwick, Shields, and all the curates in the country.
He had laid a visible ghost, that might be the devil for aught they knew
to the contrary; and it was argued on all hands, that "Davie was nae
sma' drink."

The whole of the simple group felt happy and grateful; and they agreed
to sit another hour or two before they went to sleep, and each one read
a chapter from the Bible, and recite a psalm or hymn. They did so, until
it came to Nanny's turn.

[Music: A Cameronian's Midnight Hymn.

    O thou who dwell'st in the heavens high,
    Above yon Stars and within yon Sky,
    Where the dazzling fields never needed light,
    Of the Sun by day nor the Moon by night,
    Where the dazzling fields never needed light,
    Of the Sun by day nor the Moon by night.
]

She laid her hands across each other on her breast, turned in the balls
of her half-closed eyes so that nothing was seen but the white, and,
with her face raised upwards, and a slow rocking motion, she sung the
following hymn, to a strain the most solemn that ever was heard. A scrap
of this ancient melody is still preserved, and here subjoined, for
without its effect the words are nothing.

    O thou, who dwell'st in the heavens high,
    Above yon stars, and within yon sky,
    Where the dazzling fields never needed light
    Of the sun by day, nor the moon by night!

    Though shining millions around thee stand,
    For the sake of one that's at thy right hand,
    O think of them that have cost him dear,
    Still chained in doubt and in darkness here!

    Our night is dreary, and dim our day;
    And if thou turn'st thy face away,
    We are sinful, feeble, and helpless dust,
    And have none to look to, and none to trust.

    The powers of darkness are all abroad,
    They own no Saviour, and fear no God;
    And we are trembling in dumb dismay,
    O turn not thus thy face away!

    Our morning dawn is with clouds o'erspread,
    And our evening fall is a bloody red;
    And the groans are heard on the mountain swarth;
    There is blood in heaven, and blood on earth.

    A life of scorn for us thou did'st lead,
    And in the grave laid thy blessed head;
    Then think of those who undauntedly
    Have laid down life and all for thee.

    Thou wilt not turn them forth in wrath,
    To walk this world of sin and death,
    In shadowy dim deformity?
    O God it may not--cannot be!

    Thy aid, O mighty One, we crave!
    Not shortened is thy arm to save.
    Afar from thee we now sojourn
    Return to us, O God, return!

This air, having a great resemblance to the tone and manner in which the
old Cameronians said, or rather sung their prayers, and just no more
music in it, as the singer will perceive, than what renders the
recitation more slow and solemn, Nanny's hymn affected the family group
in no ordinary degree; it made the hairs of their head creep, and
thrilled their simple hearts, easily impressed by divine things, while
their looks strongly expressed their feelings. None of them would read
or recite any thing farther, but entreated Nanny to say it over again,
affirming, with one voice that "it was an _extrodnar_ thing."

"Ah! dear, dear bairns! I dinna ken about it," said she; "he was a good
cannie lad that made it, but he mixed wi' the scoffers, and turned to
hae his doubts and his failings like mony ane, (Lord forgie us a' for
our share in them;) he seems even to have doubted o' the Omnipresence
when he penned that, which was far far wrang. I'll rather say ye ane on
that subject that he had made when in a better way o' thinking. It is
said that the Englishes sing it in their chapels."

She then attempted one in a bolder and more regular strain, but wanting
the simplicity of the former, it failed in having the same effect. As
it, however, closed the transactions of that momentous night at
Riskinhope, we shall with it close this long chapter.

    Dweller in heaven and ruler below!
    Fain would I know thee, yet tremble to know!
    How can a mortal deem, how may it be,
    That being can not be, but present with thee?
    Is it true that thou saw'st me ere I saw the morn?
    Is it true that thou knew'st me before I was born?
    That nature must live in the light of thine eye?
    This knowledge for me is too great and too high!

    That fly I to noon-day, or fly I to night,
    To shroud me in darkness, or bathe me in light,
    The light and the darkness to thee are the same,
    And still in thy presence of wonder I am?
    Should I with the dove to the desert repair;
    Or dwell with the eagle in clough of the air;
    In the desart afar, on the mountain's wild brink,
    From the eye of Omnipotence still must I shrink?

    Or mount I on wings of the morning away
    To caves of the ocean unseen by the day,
    And hide in these uttermost parts of the sea,
    Even there to be living and moving in thee?
    Nay, scale I the cloud in the heavens to dwell;
    Or make I my bed in the shadows of hell;
    Can science expound, or humanity frame,
    That still thou art present, and all are the same?

    Yes, present for ever! Almighty--alone
    Great Spirit of nature, unbounded, unknown!
    What mind can embody thy presence divine?
    I know not my own being! how can I thine?
    Then humbly and low in the dust let me bend,
    And adore what on earth I can ne'er comprehend;
    The mountains may melt, and the elements flee,
    Yet an universe still be rejoicing in thee!


END OF VOLUME FIRST.

    EDINBURGH:
    Printed by James Ballantyne & Co.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes

There is one page of music in the book; the html version of this
file has links to a midi file ([Listen]); the musical notation ([PDF]);
and and a MusicXML file ([XML]), which can be viewed in most browsers,
text editors, and music notation applications.

The book has no chapter VII and two chapters XII.

A duplicate heading before chapter one ("THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK") has
been removed.


The following are inconsistently used in the text:

Quave Brae and Quave-Brae

meantime and mean time

day-light and daylight

eye-brow and eyebrow

moon-light and moonlight

way-laid and waylaid

M'Leadle and MacLeadle

Tallo-Lins and Tallo-Linns

cleuch-brae and Cleuch-brae

Clark and Clerk

Clavers and Claverhouse


Obvious punctuation and spelling errors have been corrected as follows:

p. 30 "Several witnessess" changed to "Several witnesses"

p. 43 "'Now, billies, says I, ye" changed to "'Now, billies,' says
I, 'ye"

p. 43 "gar ye speak." changed to "gar ye speak.'"

p. 44 "shabbles o' swords!"" changed to "shabbles o' swords!'"

p. 44 "light o'the truth" changed to "light o' the truth"

p. 56 (note) "Christ in Scotland_. It is dated" changed to "Christ in
Scotland_." It is dated"

p. 131 "proffers proved alike in vain" changed to "proffers proved
alike in vain."

p. 145 "the everlasting Covenant," changed to "the everlasting
Covenant,'"

p. 160 "night-time, beats a,'" changed to "night-time, beats a',"

p. 161 "cried Maron,"--"Dear" changed to "cried Maron,--"Dear"

p. 211 "power to make a handle o" changed to "power to make a
handle o'"

p. 217 "appresion" changed to "apprehension"

p. 243 "head the creature, man,'" changed to "head the creature, man,""

p. 275 "to be eiry for him."" changed to "to be eiry for him."


Some possible errors have been left unchanged:

p. 189 "had for sometime been hopping down"

p. 196 "further precedure soon"







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK, AND OTHER TALES (VOL. 1 OF 2) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Brownie of Bodsbeck, and Other Tales (Vol. 2 of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Brownie of Bodsbeck, and Other Tales (Vol. 2 of 2)


Author: James Hogg

Release date: January 6, 2013 [eBook #41796]

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK, AND OTHER TALES (VOL. 2 OF 2) ***


E-text prepared by Henry Flower and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive/American Libraries (http://archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://archive.org/details/brownieofbodsbec02hogg


Transcriber's note:

      The Brownie of Bodsbeck has no Chapter IV. and two
      Chapters III.





THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK;

And other Tales.

Edinburgh:
Printed by James Ballantyne & Co.


THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK;

And other Tales.

by

JAMES HOGG,

Author of "The Queen's Wake," &c. &c.

   "What, has this thing appeared again to-night?"

In Two Volumes.

VOL. II.







Edinburgh;
Printed for William Blackwood, Prince's-Street:
and
John Murray, Albemarle-Street, London.
1818.




CONTENTS TO VOLUME SECOND.


                                               PAGE.

    Continuation of the Brownie of Bodsbeck        1

    The Wool-Gatherer                             87

    The Hunt of Eildon                           229




THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK.




CHAPTER I.


Next morning Davie Tait was early astir, and not having any thing better
to do, he took his plaid and staff and set out towards Whithope-head, to
see what was become of his five scores of ewes, the poor remains of a
good stock. Davie went slowly up the brae towards Riskinhope-swire, for
the events of last night were fresh in his mind, and he was conning a
new prayer to suit some other great emergency; for Davie began to think
that by fervent prayer very great things might be accomplished--that
perhaps the floods might be restrained from coming down, and the storms
of the air from descending; and that even the Piper Hill, or the Hermon
Law, might be removed out of its place. This last, however, was rather a
doubtful point to be attained, even by prayer through the best grounded
faith, for, saving the places where they already stood, there was no
room for them elsewhere in the country. He had, however, his eye fixed
on a little green gair before him, where he was determined to try his
influence with heaven once more; for his heart was lifted up, as he
afterwards confessed, and he was hasting to that little gair to kneel
down and ask a miracle, nothing doubting.

Let any one guess, if he can, what Davie Tait was going to ask. It was
not that the rains and storms of heaven might be restrained, nor that
the mountains might be removed out of their places; but Davie was going
to pray, that "when he went over at the Hewn-gate-end, as soon as he
came in sight of Whithope, he might see all his master's ewes again;
all his old friends, every one of which he knew by head-mark, going
spread and bleating on their old walk from the Earl Hill all the way to
the Braid-heads." So intent was Davie on this grand project, that he
walked himself out of breath against the hill, in order to get quickly
at the little gair to put his scheme in execution; but, as he sagely
observed, it had been graciously fore-ordained that he should not commit
this great folly and iniquity. He paused to take his breath; and in
pausing he turned about, as every man does who stops short in climbing a
hill. The scene that met Davie's eye cut his breath shorter than the
steep--his looks were rivetted on the haugh at Chapelhope--he could
scarcely believe his own eyes, though he rubbed them again and again,
and tried their effects on all things around.--"Good Lord!" said Davie,
"what a world do we live in! Gin a hale synat had sworn, I coudna hae
believed this! My sooth but the Brownie o' Bodsbeck has had a busy
night!"

Walter of Chapelhope had ten acres of as good corn as ever grew in a
moor-land district. Davie knew that when he went to his bed the evening
before, that corn was all growing in the field, dead ripe, and ready for
the sickle; and he had been lamenting that very night that such a crop
should be lost for want of reapers, in a season when there was so much
need for it. But now Davie saw that one half of that crop at least was
shorn during the night, all standing in tight shocks, rowed and hooded,
with their ends turned to the south-west.--Well might Davie exclaim, "My
sooth, but the Brownie of Bodsbeck has had a busy night!"

Davie thought no more of his five scores of ewes, nor of his prayer, nor
the miracle that was to take place in consequence of that, but turned
and ran back to Riskinhope as fast as his feet would carry him, to
arouse the rest of the people, and apprise them of this wonderful event
that had occurred beneath their noses, as he called it. He did so, and
all of them rose with wonder and astonishment, and agreed to go across
the lake and look at the Brownie's workmanship. Away they went in a body
to the edge of the stubble, but durst not set foot thereon for fear of
being affected by enchantment in some way or another; but they saw that
the corn had been shorn exactly like other corn, except that it was
rather more neat and clean than ordinary. The sheaves were bound in the
same way as other bandsters bind them; and in the shocking, the
corn-knots were all set outermost. "Weel, is not he a most unaccountable
fellow that Brownie of Bodsbeck?" said Davie Tait.

While they were thus standing in a row at the side of the shorn field,
wondering at the prowess and agility of Brownie, and trying to make some
random calculations of the thousands of cuts that he had made with his
hook that night, Katharine went by at a little distance, driving her
father's cows afield and at the same time directing her father's dog far
up the hill to turn the ewes from the Quave Brae. She was dressed in her
usual neat morning habit, with a white short-gown, green petticoat, and
her dark locks bound up with a scarlet snood; she was scolding and
cajoling the dog in a blithsome and good-humoured way, and scarcely
bestowing a look on the workmanship of her redoubted Brownie, or seeming
to regard it.

"Ay, ye may speel the brae, Keatie Laidlaw," said Davie Tait,
apostrophising her, but shaking his head all the while, and speaking in
a low voice, that his fellow-servants only might hear--"Ay, ye may speel
the brae, Keatie Laidlaw, an' drive your ewes an' your kye where ye
like; but wae's me for ye! Ye hae a weel-faurd face o' your ain, an' a
mak that's liker to an angel than a thing o' flesh an' blude; but och!
what a foul heart ye boud to hae within!--And how are ye to stand the
aftercome? There will be a black reckoning with you some day. I wadna
that my fit war i' your shoe the night for a' the ewes on the Lang
Bank."

Old Nanny went over, as usual, and assisted her to milk the cows, and
make the butter and cheese, but spoke no word that day to her young
mistress, good or bad. She regarded her with a kind of awe, and often
took a long stolen look of her, as one does of a dog that he is afraid
may be going mad.

As the people of Riskinhope went home, Dan chanced to say jocularly,
"He's a clever fellow the Brownie--I wish he would come and shear our
croft too."

"Foul fa' the tongue that said it," quoth Davie, "an' the heart that
thought the ill! Ye thinkna how easily he's forespoken. It was but last
night I said he hadna wrought to the gudeman for half his meat, an' ye
see what he has done already. I spake o' him again, and he came in
bodily. Ye should take care what ye say here, for ye little ken wha's
hearing. Ye're i' the very same predicament, billy Dan, as the tod was
in the orchard,--'Afore I war at this speed,' quo' he, 'I wad rather hae
my tail cuttit off,'--he hadna the word weel said before he stepped into
a trap, which struck, and snapt off his tail--'It's a queer place this,'
quo' he; 'ane canna speak a word but it is taen in nettle-earnest.' I'
the same way is Brownie likely to guide you; an' therefore, to prevent
him taking you at your word, we'll e'en gang an' begin the shearing
oursels."

Davie went in to seek out the hooks; he knew there were half-a-dozen
lying above the bed in the room where the spirit had been the night
before. They were gone! not a sickle was there!--Davie returned,
scratching his head, biting his lip, and looking steadily down to the
ground. "It hasna been Kirky's ghost after a'," said he; "it has been
Brownie, or some o' his gang, borrowing our hooks."

Davie lost all hope of working any great change in the country by dint
of prayer. His faith, which never was great, gave way; but yet he
always said, that when he was hasting up to the rash-bush in the little
green gair that morning, to pray for the return of his master's ewes, it
was at least equal to a grain of mustard-seed.

About eight days after that, when the moon was in the wane, the rest of
Walter's corn was all cut down in one night, and a part of the first
safely stowed in the barnyard. About the same time, too, the shepherds
began to smear their flocks at a small sheep-house and fold, built for
the purpose up nigh to the forkings of the Chapelhope-burn. It is a
custom with them to mix as much tar with grease before they begin as
they deem sufficient to smear all the sheep on the farm, or at least one
hirsell of them. This the herds of Chapelhope did; but, on the very
second morning after they began, they perceived that a good deal of
their tar was wanting; and judging that it had been stolen, they raised
a terrible affray about it with their neighbours of Riskinhope and
Corse-cleuch. Finding no marks of it, old John Hay said, "We must just
give it up, callants, for lost; there is nae doubt but some of the
fishers about Dryhope has stown it for fish-lights. There are a set of
the terriblest poachers live there that's in all the Forest."

In the afternoon John went out to the Ox-cleugh-head, to bring in a
houseful of white sheep, and to his utter astonishment saw that upwards
of an hundred ewes had been smeared during the night, by the officious
and unwearied Brownie of Bodsbeck. "The plague be in his fingers," quoth
old John to himself, "gin he haena smeared crocks an' fat sheep, an' a'
that has come in his way. This will never do."

Though the very hairs of John's head stood, on coming near to the sheep
that had been smeared by Brownie, yet seeing that his sensible dog
Keilder was nothing afraid of them, but managed them in the same way as
he did other sheep, John grew by degrees less suspicious of them. He
confessed, however, as he was shedding them from the white ones, that
there was a ewe of Brownie's smearing came running by very near him, and
he could not help giving a great jump out of her way.

All shepherds are accused of indolence, and not, perhaps, without some
reason. Though John dreaded as death all connection with Brownie, yet he
rejoiced at the progress they were likely to make in the smearing, for
it is a dirty and laborious business, and he was glad by any means to
get a share of it off his hands, especially as the season was so far
advanced. So John took in to the fold twice as many sheep as they needed
for their own smearing, put the crocks and the fat sheep out from among
them, and left them in the house to their fate, taking good care to be
out of sight of the place before dark. Next morning a certain quantity
of tar was again gone, and the sheep were all neatly smeared and keeled,
and set to the hill. This practice the shepherds continued throughout
smearing-time, and whether they housed many or few at night, they were
still all smeared and set to the hill again next morning. The smearing
of Chapelhope was finished in less than one-third of its wonted time.
Never was the labour of a farm accomplished with such expedition and
exactness, although there were none to work, to superintend, or direct
it, but one simple maiden. It became the wonder and theme of the whole
country, and has continued to be a standing winter evening tale to this
day. Where is the cottager, dwelling between the Lowthers and Cheviot,
who has not heard tell of the feats of the Brownie of Bodsbeck?




CHAPTER II.


Walter was hardly used in prison for some time, but at last Drummelzier
found means of rendering his situation more tolerable. Several of his
associates that were conducted with him from Dumfries died in jail; he
said they seemed to have been forgotten both by the council and their
friends, but they kept up so good a heart, and died with such apparent
satisfaction, that he could scarcely be sorry for their release by
death, though he acknowledged, that a happiness beyond the grave was
always the last kind of happiness that he wished to his friends. His own
trial was a fire-side theme for him as long as he lived, but he
confounded names and law terms, and all so much through other, that,
were it given wholly in his own words, it would be unintelligible. It
came on the 12th of November, and Sir George Lockhart and Mr Alexander
Hay were his counsel. His indictment bore, that he had sheltered on his
farm a set of the most notorious and irreclaimable rebels in the whole
realm; that sundry of his majesty's right honest liege subjects had been
cruelly murdered there, very near to the prisoner's house, and a worthy
curate in the immediate vicinity. It stated the immense quantity of
victuals found in his house, and the numbers of fugitive whigs that were
seen skulking in the boundaries of his farm; and also how some false
delinquents were taken and executed there.

Clavers was present, as he had a right to be when he desired it, and
gave strong and decided evidence against him. The time had been, and not
long agone, when, if the latter had manifested such sentiments against
any one, it had been sufficient for his death-warrant; but the killing
time was now nearly over, and those in power were only instituting
trials in order to impose heavy fines and penalties, that they might
glean as much of the latter vintage of that rich harvest as possible,
before the sickle was finally reft from their grasp. Several witnesses
were examined to prove the above accusations, and among the rest Daniel
Roy Macpherson, whose deposition was fair, manly, and candid. As soon as
his examination was over, he came and placed himself near to Walter, who
rejoiced to see him, and deemed that he saw in him the face of a friend.

Witnesses were next called to prove his striking Captain Bruce with his
fist, and also tripping the heels from Ingles, and tossing him over a
steep, while in the discharge of his duty, whereby he was rendered
unable to proceed in the king's business. Walter, being himself examined
on these points, confessed both, but tried to exculpate himself as well
as he could.

"As to Bruce, my masters," said he, "I didna ken that he was a captain,
or what he was; he pu'd up his bit shabble of a sword an' dang aff my
bonnet, when I was a free man i' my ain ben-end. I likit nae sic
freedoms, as I had never been used wi' them, sae I took up my neive an'
gae him a yank on the haffat till I gart his bit brass cap rattle
against the wa'. I wonder ye dinna ceete me too for nippin' Jock
Graham's neck there, as he ca'd himsel, that day, an' his freend Tam
Liviston--There's nae word o' that the day!--Nah! but I could tell an' I
likit what I hae been put to a' this plague for."

Here the advocate stopped him, by observing that he was wandering from
the point in question, and his own counsel were always trembling for him
when he began to speak for himself. Being asked, what defence he had to
offer for kicking and maltreating a king's officer in the discharge of
his duty?

"If it was that drunken dirt Ingles that ye mean," said Walter, "I dinna
ken what ye ca' a man's duty here, but it surely coudna be a duty, when
my hands war tied ahint my back, to kick me i' the wame; an' that's what
he was doing wi' a' his pith, whan I gart him flee heels-ower-head like
a batch o' skins."

Sir George MacKenzie and Dalrymple of Stair both laughed outright at
this answer, and it was some time before the business could proceed. Sir
George Lockhart, however, compelled them to relinquish these parts of
the indictment, on account of the treatment offered to the prisoner, and
the trial proceeded on the charges previously mentioned, which were
found relevant. Walter was utterly confounded at the defence made for
him by Sir George Lockhart. He was wont to say, "Aih but he's a terrible
clever body yon Geordie Lockie! od he kend mair about me, and mair that
was in my favour, than I did mysel."

The conclusion of this trial must be given in Walter's own phrase. "I
pretendit to be very crouse, an' no ae bit fear'd--aha! I was unco
fear'd for a' that--I coudna swally my spittle for the hale day, an' I
fand a kind o' foost, foost, foostin about my briskit that I coudna win
aneath ava. But when the chield MacKenzie began to clink thegither the
evidence against me, gude faith I thought it was a' ower wi' me then; I
saw nae outgate, an' lost a' hope; mair than aince I tried to think o'
auld Maron Linton an' the bairns, but I could think about naething, for
I thought the house was heaving up i' the tae side, and gaun to whommel
a' the judges an' jurymen on the tap o' me. He revertit aye to the
evidence of Clerk the curate, wha had said that I had a private
correspondence wi' the whigs, an' then he brought a' the ither proof to
bear upon that, till he made my guilt perfectly plain; an' faith I
coudna say that the chiel guessed far wrang. Then my Lord Moray, wha was
head judge that day, was just gaun to address the jurymen, an' direct
them to hang me, when up gat Geordie Lockie again for the hindmost time;
(he had as mony links an' wimples in his tail as an eel that body,) an'
he argyed some point o' law that gart them a' glowr; at last he said,
that it was hard, on a point of life an' death, to take the report of a
man that wasna present to make oath to the information he had gi'en,
which might be a slander to gain some selfish end; and he prayed, for
the satisfaction of the jury, that his client might be examined on that
point, (he ca'd me aye _a client_, a name that I abhorred, for I didna
ken the meaning o't, but I trowed it meant nae good,) for, says he, he
has answered very freely, and much to the point, a' that ye hae speered
at him. I was just considering what I should say, but I could get nought
to say ava, when I was startit wi' a loud Hem! just amaist at my elbow.
I naturally liftit up my een, very stupit like, I dare say, to see what
it was; and wha was it but the queer Highland chap Roy Macpherson,
makin' sic faces to me as ye never saw. I thought he was wanting to mak
me recollect something, but what it was I coudna tell. I was
dumfoundered sae, that when the judge put the question to me about Clerk
I never answered a word, for I was forefoughten wi' another thought. At
length I mindit the daft advice that honest Macpherson gae me at parting
with me in Dumfries, which was sic a ridiculous advice I had never
thought o't mair. But now, thinks I to mysel, things canna be muckle
waur wi' me; the scrow's come fairly to the neb o' the miresnipe now;
an' never had I better reason to be angry than at the base curate whom I
had fed an' clad sae aften. Sae I musters a' my wrath up into my face,
and when the judge, or the advocate, put the question again, I never
heedit what it was, but set up my birses an' spak to them as they had
been my herd callants. What the deil are ye a' after? quoth I. G----d
d----n the hale pack o' ye, do ye think that auld Wat Laidlaw's a whig, or
wad do aught against his king, or the laws o' his country? They ken little
about him that say sae! I aince fought twa o' the best o' them armed wi'
swords, an' wi' nought but my staff I laid them baith flat at my feet;
an' had I ony twa o' ye on the Chapelhope-flow thegither, if ye dared to
say that I was a whig, or a traitor to my king, I wad let ye find
strength o' arm for aince. Here the wily chap Geordie Lockie stappit me
in great agitation, and beggit me to keep my temper, and answer his
lordship to the point, what defence I had to make against the
information given by Clerk the curate? He be d----d! said I: he kens the
contrair o' that ower weel; but he kend he wad be master an' mair when
he gat me away frae about the town. He wantit to wheedle my wife out o'
ilk thing she had, an' to kiss my daughter too, if he could. Vile
brock! gin I war hame at him I'll dad his head to the wa'; ay, an' ony
twa o' ye forby, quo' I, raising my voice, an' shaking that neive at
them,--ony twa o' ye that dare set up your faces an' say that I'm a whig
or a rebel.--A wheen d----d rascals, that dinna ken what ye wad be at!

"The hale court was thunnerstruck, an' glowred at ane anither like
wullcats. I gae a sklent wi' my ee to Daniel Roy Macpherson, an' he was
leaned ower the back o' the seat, and fa'n into a kink o' laughing. The
hale crowd ahint us got up wi' a great hurra! an' clappit their hands,
an' I thought the fock war a' gaen mad thegither. As soon as there was a
wee quiet, my lord the Earl o' Moray he speaks across to Clavers, an' he
says: 'This winna do, my lord; that carl's nae whig, nor naething akin
to them. Gin that be nae a sound worthy man, I never saw ane, nor heard
ane speak.' An' wi' that the croud shoutit an' clappit their hands
again. I sat hinging my head then, an' looking very blate, but I was
unco massy for a' that. They then spak amang themsels for five or sax
minents, and they cried on my master Drumelzier, an' he gaed up an'
crackit wi' them too; an' at last the judge tauld me, that the
prosecution against me was drappit for the present, an' that gin I could
raise security for twa thousand merks, to appear again if cited before
the first of June, 1686, I was at liberty to go about my business. I
thankit his lordship; but thinks I to mysel, ye're a wheen queer chaps!
Ye shoot fock for praying an' reading the Bible, an' whan ane curses an'
damns ye, ye ca' him a true honest man! I wish ye be nae the deil's
bairns, the halewort o' ye! Drumelzier an' Lockie cam security for me at
aince, an' away I sets for hame, as weel satisfied as ever I was a' my
life, that I mind o'.

"Weel, when I came out to the closs at the back o' the prison, a' the
fock croudit about me; an' _he_ shook hands wi' me; an' _he_ shook
hands wi' me; an' the young chaps they hurra'd an' waved their caps, an'
cried out, Ettrick Forest for ever!--Auld Braid-Bonnet for ever,--hurra!
An' I cam up the Lawn-Market, an' down the Bow, wi' sic an army at my
tail, as I had been gaun away to fight Boddell-Brigg owre again.

"I now begoud to think it wad be as weel to gie the lads the slip, for
my army was gathering like a snaw-ba', an' I little wist how sic a
hobbleshue might end; sae I jinkit into Geordie Allan's, at the
West-Port, where I had often been afore, when selling my eild ewes and
chasers; an' I whispered to them to keep out my sodgers, for there were
too many of them for the house to haud; but they not perfectly
understanding my jest, I was not well entered ere I heard a loud
altercation at the head o' the stair, an' the very first aith that I
heard I knew it to be Macpherson."

"Py Cot's preath, put she shall pe coing in; were not she her friend and
couhnsel?"

"You his counsel? A serjeant of dragoons his counsel? That winna do. He
charged that nae sodgers should get in. Get aff wi' your Hieland
impudence--brazen-faced thief!"

"Fat? Tief? Cot t--n y' mack-en dhu na bhaish!
M'Leadle!--Trocho!--Hollo! Cresorst!"

"I ran to the door to take the enraged veteran in my arms, and welcome
him as my best friend and adviser, but they had bolted the inner door in
his face, through which he had run his sword amaist to the hilt, an' he
was tugging an' pu'ing at it to get it out again, swearing a' the time
like a true dragoon. I led him into my room, an' steekit the door o't,
but there he stood wi' his feet asperr, and his drawn sword at arm's
length ahint his back, in act to make a lounge at the door, till he had
exhausted a' his aiths, baith in Gaelic an' English, at the fock o' the
house, and then he sheathed his sword, and there was nae mair about it.

"I speered what I could do to oblige him?"

"Hu, not creat moach at hall, man; only pe kiffing me your hand. Py
Cot's poy, put if you tit not stonish tem! Vas not I peen telling you
tat him's hearty curse pe te cood?"

"My certy," quo' I, "but ye did do that, or I wad never hae thought o't;
ye're an auld-farrant honest chiel! I am sorry that I canna just now
make ye sic a present as ye deserve; but ye maun come out an' see me."

"Present! Poo, poo, poo! Teol more, take te present tat pe coing petween
friends, and she may have sharper works tan pe coing visits; put not te
more, she pe haifing small favour to seek."

"Od, man," says I, "ye hae been the mean o' preserving my life, an' ye
sanna ax a thing that I'll refuse, e'en to my ain doughter. An' by the
by, serjeant, gin ye want a good wife, an' a bonny ane, I'll gie ye sic
a tocher wi' my Keatie, as never was gi'en wi' a farmer's lassie i' the
Forest."

"Hu! Cot pe plessing you! She haif cot wife, and fery hexcellent
boddach, with two childs after him."

"What is it then, serjeant? Gin the thing be in my power, ye hae
naething ado but to say the word."

"Do you know tat her nainsell pe coosin to yourself?"

"Od, man," quo' I, "that's hardly possible, or else the taen o' us has
come o' the wrang side o' the blanket."

"Now do you just pe holding your paice for a fery less time, for you
must halways pe spaik spaiking, without knowing fat to say, unless I
were putting it into your haid. I haif tould ould Simon Glas Macrhimmon,
who knows all the pedigrees from the creation of the world, and he says
that te Lheadles are all Macphersons; for, in the days of Rory More of
Ballindalloch and Invereshie, tere was te Gordons, who would pe making
grheat prhogress on te Sassenach, and tere went down wit Strabogie of
te clan Ahnderson, and te clan Grhaham, and one Letulloch Macpherson of
Strathneshalloch, vit as bould a clan after her as any and mhore; and
they would pe toing creat might upon the Sassenach, and they would pe
killing her in tousands, and ten she cot crheat lhands out of King
Robert on te Bhorder, and Letulloch he had a whoule country to himself.
But te people could not pe putting her nhame into worts, and instead of
Letulloch tey called her _Leadlea_ and te Sassenach she called her
_Little_, so that all tese are of Macpherson, and you may pe te chief,
and te forward son of te crheat Strathneshalloch himself. Now tat I
would pe te tog, and te shame, and te tisgrhace, not to help my owhn
poor clansman and prhother out of te evil, tat would pe worse eneuch;
and te ting tat I would pe asking of you is tis, tat you will always
look upon a Macpherson as a prhother until te end of te world, and pe
standing py her as long as tere is peing one trop of plood in your whole
poty."

"Gude faith, serjeant," says I, "I never was sae happy as to find, that
the man to whom I hae been sae muckle obliged is sic a noble
disinterested chiel; an' there's my hand, I'll never gie up the cause of
a Macpherson, if he's in the right."

"Hu! Cot t--n your _right_! a clansman speak of the right! Any man will
stand py me when I am in te right, put wit a phrother I must always pe
in te right. No right or wrong tere, py Cot!--Poo, poo!"

"Od, man," quo' I, "that's a stretch o' billyhood that I was never up to
afore but sin' ye say't, may I never see the Hermon Law again gif I
winna stand by it. Come, then, we'll hae a stoup o' brandy, or a bottle
o' wine thegither, for a parting cup."

"Hu!--no, no! None of your prandies or your wines for me!--I must pe on
duty in less than an hour, and I would not pe tasting any of your tamn
prandies or wines. No, no!--Cot pless you!--And should she never pe
seeing your face again, you will pe----"

"He could say nae mair, for the muckle round tears were coming hopping
down owre his weather-beaten cheek, but he gae my hand a hard squeeze
an' a shake, an' brak out at the door; an' that was my last sight of
honest Daniel Roy Macpherson, a man that I hae met few like! I was tauld
lang after, that he fell fighting like a lion against the Campbells, at
the battle o' Killiekranky, and that, to the last day o' his life, he
spake o' his kinsman, ould MacLeadle."




CHAPTER III.


It was on the inauspicious night of All-Hallow-eve, that Walter arrived
again at his own house, after so long an absence; but some of the
farmers of Manor-Water, his acquaintances, were so overjoyed at seeing
him again, that they persuaded him to go in, taste of their cheer, and
relate his adventures and his trial to them; and so long was he detained
in this way, that it was dark before he left Dollar-Burn; yet so anxious
was he to get home to his family, and all unconscious that it was
Hallow-E'en, the great jubilee of the fairies and all the spirits of
these mountain regions, he set out on his journey homeward, across the
dreary moors of Meggat-dale. Walter found his way full well, for he knew
every brae, height, and declivity by the way, and many delightful
little dreams was he cherishing in his heart, how he would surprise
Maron an' the bairns by his arrival, and how extravagantly delighted his
excellent and generous dog Reaver would be; for he often said, "he had
mair sense about him than what was a beast's good right;" but, above
all, his mind dwelt most on his dear lassie Kate, as he called her. He
had been informed by Drummelzier of all that she had done for him, who
gave her a character so high before some friends of his who were
present, that Walter never was so proud in his life, and he longed, with
all a father's fondness, to clasp "his bit dear kind-heartit lassie"
again in his arms.

With all these delightful and exhilarating thoughts glowing in his
breast, how could that wild and darksome road, or indeed any road, be
tedious to our honest goodman? For, as to the evil spirits with whom his
beloved Keatie was in conjunction, the idea had died away like a thing
of the imagination, and he barely spent a thought upon it. He crossed
the Meggat about eleven o'clock in the night, just as the waning moon
began to peep over the hills to the south-east of the lake,--but such
scenes, and such adventures, are not worth a farthing, unless described
and related in the language of the country to which they are peculiar.

"I fand I was come again into the country o' the fairies an' the
spirits," said Walter; "an' there was nae denying o't; for when I saw
the bit crookit moon come stealing o'er the kipps o' Bowerhope-Law, an'
thraw her dead yellow light on the hills o' Meggat, I fand the very
nature an' the heart within me changed. A' the hills on the tae side o'
the loch war as dark as pitch, an' the tither side had that ill-hued
colour on't, as if they had been a' rowed in their windling sheets; an'
then the shadow o' the moon it gaed bobbing an' quivering up the loch
fornent me, like a streek o' cauld fire. In spite o' my teeth I turned
eiry, an' the mair I feucht against it I grew the eiryer, for whenever
the spirits come near ane, that kind o' feeling comes on.

"Weel, just as I was gaun round the end o' the Wedder-Law, a wee bit
aboon the head o' the Braken Wood, I sees a white thing on the road
afore me. At the first it appeared to be gaun away, but at length I saw
it coming nearer an' nearer me, keeping aye a little aboon the road till
I came amaist close to it, an' then it stood stane-still an' glowred at
me. What in the wide world can it be that is here at sic an untimely
time o' night as this? thinks I to mysel. However, I steps aye on, an'
wasna gaun to mak nor meddle wi't ava, till at last, just as I was gaun
by, it says in a soft low voice,--"Wow, friend, but ye gang late the
night!"

"Faith, no muckle later than yoursel," quo' I, "gin it be your will."

"O'er late on sic a night!" quoth the creature again; "o'er late on
Hallow E'en, an' that ye will find."

"It elyed away o'er the brow, an' I saw nae mair o't. "Lord sauf us!
quo' I to mysel, is this Hallow-E'en? I wish I war safe at hame, or in
amang Christian creatures o' ony kind!--Or had I but my fine dog Reaver
wi' me, to let me ken when the fairies are coming near me--Goodness to
the day! I may be amang the mids o' them ere ever I ken what I'm doing."
A' the stories that ever I heard about fairies in my life came linkin
into my mind ane after anither, and I almaist thought I was already on
my road to the Fairy-land, an' to be paid away to hell, like a
kane-cock, at the end o' seven years. I likit the boding o' the
apparition I had met wi' unco ill, but yet I had some hopes that I was
o'er muckle, an' o'er heavy metal for the fairies. Hout, thinks I, what
need I be sae feared? They'll never take away ane o' my size to be a
fairy--Od, I wad be the daftest-like fairy ever was seen.

"I had naething for't but to stride on as fast as I could, an' on I
comes till I comes to the bit brae at the side o' the Ox-Cleuch-Lea,
an' there I heard something fistling amang the brakens, an' making a
kind o' wheenge, wheenge, wheenging, that gart a' my heart loup to my
mouth; an' what was this but my poor dog Reaver, coming creeping on his
wame, an' sae fain to meet me again that he hardly kend what he was
doing. I took him up in my arms an' clappit him, an' said a' the kind
things to him that I could, an' O sic a wark an' fidgetting as he made!
But yet I couldna help thinking there was a kind o' doufness and
mellancholly in his looks. What ails ye, Reaver man? quo' I. I wish a'
may be weel about Chapelhope the night; but ye canna tell me that, poor
fallaw, or else ye wad. He sometimes lickit my stocking wi' his tongue,
an' sometimes my hand, but he wadna gang away afore me as he used to do,
cocking his tail sae massy like; an' I feared sair that a' wasna right
about hame, an' can hardly tell ony body how I felt,--fock's ain are aye
their ain!

"At length I came amaist close to the bit brow o' the Lang Bank that
brought me in sight o' my ain house, but when I lookit ower my shoulder
Reaver was fled. I grew fearder than ever, an' wistna what to think; an'
wi' that I sees a queer-like shapen thing standing straight on the road
afore me. Now, thinks I, this is the Brownie o' Bodsbeck; I wadna face
him for a' the warld; I maun try to gie him the slip. Sae I slides aff
the road, an' down a bit howe into the side o' the loch, thinking I wad
get up within the brae out o' sight o' him--But aha! there was he
standing straight afore me on the shore. I clamb the brae again, and sae
did he. Now, thinks I, his plan is first to pit me out o' my reason, an'
then wear me into the loch and drown me; I'll keep an open side wi' him.
Sae up the hill I scrambles wi' a' my speed, an' doun again, and up
again, five or six times; but still he keepit straight afore me. By this
time I was come by degrees very near him, an' waxed quite desperate, an
desperation made me crouse. 'In the name o' God,' cries I, 'what are ye
that winna let me by to my ain house?"

"Did you see a woman on your way?" said the creature in a deep solemn
voice.

"Yes, I did," answered I.

"Did she tell you any thing?" said the apparition again.

"No," said I.

"Then I must," said the creature. "You go no nearer to your own house
to-night."

"Say you sae?" said I; "but I'll gang to my ain house the night, though
sax like you stood atween me an' it."

"I charge you," said the thing again, "that you go not nearer to it. For
your own sake, and the sakes of those that are dearest to you, go back
the gate you came, and _go not_ to that house."

"An' pray wha may you be that's sae peremptory?" said I.

"A stranger here, but a friend to you, Laidlaw. Here you do not pass
to-night."

I never could bide to be braved a' my life. "Say you sae, friend?" quo'
I; "then let me tell ye, stand out o' my way; or be ye brownie or
fairy--be ye ghaist, or be ye deil--in the might o' Heaven, I sall gie
ye strength o' arm for aince; an' here's a cudgel that never fell in
vain."

"So saying, I took my stick by the sma' end wi' baith my hands, an'
heaving it ower my shoulder I came straight on to the apparition, for I
hardly kend what I was doing; an' my faith it had gotten a paik! but it
had mair sense than to risk it; for when it saw that I was dementit, it
e'en steppit quietly aff the road, and said, wi' a deep grane, "Ye're a
wilfu' man, Laidlaw, an' your wilfu'ness may be your undoing. Pass on
your ways, and Heaven protect your senses."

"I dredd sair I was doing wrang, but there was something in my nature
that wadna be contrair'd; sae by I went, an' lookit full at the thing as
I past. It had nouther face nor hands, nor head nor feet; but there was
it standing like a lang corn sack. L----d tak me, (as Serjeant Macpherson
said,) if I kend whether I was gaun on my feet or the crown o' my head.

"The first window that I came to was my ain, the ane o' that room where
Maron and I slept. I rappit at it wi' a rap that wont to be weel kend,
but it was barred, an' a' was darkness and vacancy within. I tried every
door and window alang the foreside o' the house, but a' wi' the same
effect. I rappit an' ca'd at them a', an' named every name that was in
the house when I left it, but there was nouther voice, nor light, nor
sound. 'Lord have a care o' me!' said I to mysel, 'what's come o' a' my
fock? Can Clavers hae been here in my absence an' taen them a' away? or
has the Brownie o' Bodsbeck eaten them up, stoop an' roop? For a' that I
hae wearied to see them, here I find my house left unto me desolate.
This is a waesome welcome hame to a father, an' a husband, an' a
master!--O Lord! O Lord! what will come o' puir auld Wat now?'

"The Auld Room was a place I never thought o' gangin to; but no kenning
what to mak o' mysel, round the west end o' the house I gaes towards the
door o' the Auld Room. I soon saw through the seam atween the shutters
that there was a light in it, an' kenning weel that there was a broken
lozen, I edged back the shutter naturally to see what was gaun on
within--May never a father's e'e again see sic a sight as mine
saw!--There was my dear, my only daughter Katharine, sitting on the bed
wi' a dead corpse on her knee, and her hands round its throat; and there
was the Brownie o' Bodsbeck, the ill-faurd, runkled, withered thing, wi'
its eildron form and grey beard, standin at the bed side hauding the
pale corpse by the hand. It had its tither hand liftit up, and was
mutter, muttering some horrid spell, while a crew o' the same kind o'
grizly beardit phantoms were standin round them. I had nae doubt but
there had been a murder committit, and that a dissection was neist to
take place; and I was sae shock'd that I was just gaun to roar out. I
tried it twice, but I had tint my voice, and could do naething but gape.

"I now fand there was a kind o' swarf coming o'er me, for it came up,
up, about my heart, an' up, up, o'er my temples, till it darkened my
een; an' I fand that if it met on the crown o' my head I was gane. Sae I
thought it good, as lang as that wee master bit was sound, to make my
escape, an' aff I ran, an' fell, an' fell, an' rase an' ran again. As
Riskinhope was the nearest house, I fled for that, where I wakened Davie
Tait out o' his bed in an unco plight. When he saw that I was a'
bedaubit wi' mire o'er head an' ears, (for I had faun a hunder times,)
it was impossible to tell wha o' us was maist frightit.

"Lord sauf us, goodman," quo' he, "are ye hangit?"

"Am I hangit, ye blockhead!" says I; "what do ye mean?"

"I m-m-mean," says Davie, "w-w-war ye ek-ek-execute?"

"Dinna be feared for an auld acquaintance, Davie," quo I, "though he
comes to you in this guise."

"Guise!" said Davie, staring and gasping for breath--"Gui-gui-guise!
Then it se-e-e-eems ye _are_ dead?"

"Gin I were dead, ye fool," quoth I, "how could I be here? Give me your
hand."

"Uh-uh-uh-uuuh!" cried Davie, as I wore him up to the nook, and took
haud o' his hand by force. "Uh, goodman, ye are flesh and blude yet! But
O ye're cauld an' ugsome!"

"Davie," quoth I, "bring me a drink, for I hae seen something o'er-bye
an' I'm hardly just mysel."

Davie ran and brought me a hale bowie-fu' milk. "Tak a gude waught,
goodman," quo' he, "an' dinna be discouraged. Ye maun lay your account
to see and hear baith, sic things as ye never saw or heard afore, gin ye
be gaun to bide here. Ye needna wonder that I thought ye war dead,--the
dead are as rife here now as the living--they gang amang us, work amang
us, an' speak to us; an' them that we ken to be half-rotten i' their
graves, come an' visit our fire-sides at the howe o' the night. There
hae been sad doings here sin ye gaed away, goodman!"

"Sad doings I fear, indeed, Davie!" says I. "Can ye tell me what's
become o' a' my family?"

"Troth can I, goodman. Your family are a' weel. Keatie's at hame her
lievahlane, an' carrying on a' the wark o' the farm as weel as there war
a hunder wi' her. Your twa sons an' auld Nanny bide here; an' the honest
gudewife hersel she's away to Gilmanscleuch. But oh, gudeman, there are
sad things gaun on o'er-bye yonder; an' mony a ane thinks it will hae a
black an' a dreadfu' end. Sit down an' thraw aff your dirty claes, an'
tell us what ye hae seen the night."

"Na, na, Davie! unless I get some explanation, the thing that I hae seen
the night maun be lockit up in this breast, an' be carried to the grave
wi' it. But, Davie, I'm unco ill; the cauld sweat is brekking on me frae
head to foot. I'm feared I gang away athegither."

"Wow, gudeman, what can be done?" quo' Davie. "Think ye we sudna tak the
beuk?"

"I was sae faintish I coudna arguy wi' the fool, an' ere ever I wist he
has my bonnet whuppit aff, and is booling at a sawm; and when that was
done, to the prayin' he fa's, an' sic nonsense I never heard prayed a'
my life. I'll be a rogue gin he wasna speakin' to his Maker as he had
been his neighbour herd; an' then he was baith fleetching an' fighting
wi' him. However, I came something to mysel again, an' Davie he thought
proper to ascribe it a' to his bit ragabash prayer."

Walter spent a restless and a troubled morning till day-light, and Davie
said, that wearied as he was, he believed he never closed his een, for
he heard him frequently turning in the bed, and moaning to himself; and
he heard him once saying, with deep sighs as if weeping,--"O my poor
Keatie Laidlaw! what is to become o' her! My poor lost, misled lassie!
Wae's my heart for her! I fear she is ruined for this world--an' for the
aftercome, I dare hardly venture to think about it!--O wae's me for my
poor luckless bairn!"




CHAPTER III.


Next morning Walter and his two sons, and old Nanny, went all over to
Chapelhope together, just as the cows came to the loan; and the farmer
was sundry times remarking by the way that "day-light had mony een!" The
truth was, that the phantoms of superstition had in a measure fled with
the shadows of the night, which they seldom fail to do. They, indeed,
remain in the bosom, hid, as it were, in embryo, ready to be embodied
again at the fall of the long shadow in the moon-light, or the evening
tale round the fading embers; but Walter at this time, perhaps, regarded
the visions of last night as dreams scarcely remembered, and less
believed, and things which in the open day he would have been ashamed
to have acknowledged.

Katharine had begun a-milking, but when she beheld her father coming
across the meadow, she left her leglen and ran home. Perhaps it was to
put his little parlour in order, for no one of the family had set foot
within that house but herself for three weeks--or perhaps she did not
choose that their meeting should be witnessed by other eyes. In short,
she had something of importance to put to rights--for home she ran with
great haste; and Walter, putting his sons to some work to detain them,
followed her all alone. He stepped into the parlour, but no one being
there, he sat down on his elbow chair, and began to look about him. In a
few seconds his daughter entered--flung herself on her father's knee and
bosom--clasped her arms about his neck--kissed him, and shed a flood of
tears on his breast. At first he felt somewhat startled at her embrace,
and his arms made a feeble and involuntary effort to press her away
from him; but she grew to him the closer, and welcomed him home with
such a burst of filial affection and tenderness, that nature in a short
time regained her empire over the father's heart; and there was to be
seen old Walter with his large hands pressing her slender waist, keeping
her at a little distance from him on his knee, and looking stedfastly in
her face, with the large tear rolling in his eye. It was such a look as
one sometimes takes of the corpse of one that was dearly beloved in
life. Well did she read this look, for she had the eye of the eagle for
discernment; but she hid her face again on his shoulder, and
endeavoured, by familiar enquiries, to wean him insensibly from his
reserve, and draw him into his wonted freedom of conversation with her.

"Ye ken o'er well," said he at length, "how deep a haud ye hae o' this
heart, Keatie. Ye're my ain bairn still, and ye hae done muckle for my
life--but"----

"Muckle for your life!" said she, interrupting him--"I have been but too
remiss. I have regretted every hour that I was not with you attending
you in prison, administering to all my father's wants, and helping to
make the time of bondage and suspense pass over more lightsomely; but
grievous circumstances have prevented me. I have had sad doings here
since you went away, my dear father--there is not a feeling that can
rack the human heart that has not been my share. But I will confess all
my errors to my father, fall at his knees, and beg his forgiveness--ay,
and I hope to receive it too."

"The sooner ye do sae the better then, Keatie," said he--"I was here
last night, an' saw a sight that was enough to turn a father's heart to
stane."

"_You were here last night!_" said she emphatically, while her eyes were
fixed on the ground--"You were here last night! Oh! what shall become of
me!"

"Ay, weel may ye say sae, poor lost and undone creature! I was here last
night, though worn back by some o' your infernals, an' saw ye in the
mids o' your dreadfu' game, wi' a' your bike o' hell round about ye. I
watna what your confession and explanation may do; but without these I
hae sworn to myself, and I'll keep my aith, that you and I shall never
night thegither again in the same house, nor the same part o' the
country--ay, though it should bring down my grey hairs wi' sorrow to the
grave, I'll keep that aith."

"I fear it will turn out a rash vow," said she, "and one that we may all
repent to the last day that we have to live. There is danger and
jeopardy in the business, and it is connected with the lives and souls
of men; therefore, before we proceed farther in it, relate to me all the
circumstances of your trial, and by what means you are liberated."

"I'll do that cheerfully," said Walter, "gin it war but to teach you
compliance."

He then went over all the circumstances of his extraordinary trial, and
the conditions on which he was discharged; and ended by requiring her
positively to give him the promised explanation.

"So you are only then out on bail," said she, "and liable to be cited
again on the same charges?"

"No more," was the reply.

"It is not then time yet for my disclosure," said she; "and no power on
earth shall wring it from me; therefore, my dear father, let me beg of
you to urge your request no farther, that I may not be under the painful
necessity of refusing you again."

"I hae tauld ye my determination, Keatie," returned he; "an' ye ken I'm
no very apt to alter. If I should bind ye in a cart wi' my ain hands, ye
shall leave Chapelhope the night, unless ye can avert that by explaining
your connections to me. An' why should ye no?--Things can never appear
waur to my mind than they are just now--If hell itself had been opened
to my e'e, an' I had seen you ane o' the inmates, I coudna hae been
mair astoundit than I was yestreen. I'll send ye to Edinburgh, an' get
ye safely put up there, for I canna brook things ony langer in this
state. I winna hae my family scattered, an' made a bye-word and an
astonishment to the hale country this gate--Outher tell me the meaning
o't, or lay your account to leave your father's house this day for
ever."

"You do not know what you ask, father--the thing is impossible. Was ever
a poor creature so hard bestead! Will not you allow me a few days to
prepare for such a departure?"

"No ae day, nor ae hour either, Kate. Ye see this is a situation o'
things that canna' be tholed ony langer."

She sat down as if in deep meditation, but she neither sobbed nor wept.
"You are only out on bail," said she, "and liable to be tried again on
the same grounds of charge?"

"Ay, nae mair," said Walter; "but what need ye harp on that? I'm safe
enough. I forgot to tell you that the judges were sae thoroughly
convinced of my loyalty and _soundness_, (as they ca'd it) that they
wadna risk me to the vote of a jury; an' that the bit security they
sought was naething but a mere sham to get honourably quit of me. I was
likewise tauld by ane that kens unco weel, that the king has gotten
ither tow to teaze than persecuting whigs ony langer, an' that there
will soon be an order put out of a very different nature. There is never
to be mair blood shed on account of the covenanted reformation in
Scotland."

When Walter began this speech, his daughter lifted up her downcast eyes,
and fixed them on his face with a look that manifested a kind of
hopeless apathy; but as he advanced, their orbs enlarged, and beamed
with a radiance as if she had been some superior intelligence. She did
not breathe--or, if she did, it stole imperceptibly from between her
parted ruby lips. "What did you say, my dear father?" said she.

"What did I say!" repeated Walter, astonished and nettled at the
question--"What the deil was i' your lugs, that ye didna hear what I
said? I'm sure I spake out. Ye are thinking o' something else, Kate."

"Be so good as repeat every word that you said over again," said she,
"and tell me whence you drew your intelligence."

Walter did so; repeating it in still stronger and more energetic
language than he had done before, mentioning at the same time how he had
his information, which could not be doubted.

"It is enough, my dear father," said she. "Say not another word about
it. I will lay open all my errors to my father this instant--come with
me, and I will show you a sight!"

As she said this, she put her arm in her father's to lead him away; but
Walter looked about him with a suspicious and startled eye, and drew
somewhat back.

"You must go instantly," continued she, "there is no time so fit; and
whatever you may see or hear, be not alarmed, but follow me, and do as I
bid you."

"Nane o' your cantrips wi' me, Kate," said Walter--"I see your drift
weel eneugh, but ye'll find yoursel disappointit. I hae lang expectit it
wad come to this; but I'm determined against it."

"Determined against what, my dear father?"

"Ye want to mak a warlock o' me, ye imp o' mischief," said Walter; "but
I hae taen up my resolution there, an' a' the temptations o' Satan sanna
shake it. Nah! Gudefaith, auld Wat o' the Chapelhope's no gaun to be led
away by the lug an' the horn to the deil that gate."

Katharine's mien had a tint of majesty in it, but it was naturally
serious. She scarcely ever laughed, and but seldom smiled; but when she
did so, the whole soul of delight beamed in it. Her face was like a dark
summer day, when the clouds are high and majestic, and the lights on the
valley mellowed into beauty. Her smile was like a fairy blink of the sun
shed through these clouds, than which, there is nothing in nature that I
know of so enlivening and beautiful. It was irresistible;--and such a
smile beamed on her benign countenance, when she heard her father's wild
suspicions expressed in such a blunt and ardent way; but it conquered
them all--he went away with her rather abashed, and without uttering
another word.

They walked arm in arm up by the side of the burn, and were soon out of
sight of Nanny and the boys. Walter was busy all the way trying to form
some conjecture what the girl meant, and what was to be the issue of
this adventure, and began to suspect that his old friends, the
Covenant-men, were some way or other connected with it; that it was
they, perhaps, who had the power of raising those spirits by which his
dwelling had been so grievously haunted, for he had heard wonderful
things of them. Still there was no coindication of circumstances in any
of the calculations that he was able to make, for his house had been
haunted by Brownie and his tribe long ere he fell in with the fugitive
Covenanters. None of them had ever given him the least hint about the
matter, or the smallest key to it, which he believed they would have
done; nor had he ever mentioned a word of his connection with them to
one of his family, or indeed to any one living. Few were the words that
past between the father and daughter in the course of that walk, but it
was not of long duration.

They soon came to the precipitate linn on the South Grain, where the
soldiers had been slain. Katharine being a little way before, began to
scramble across the face of the rock by a path that was hardly
perceptible. Walter called after her, "Where are ye gaun, Keatie? It's
impossible to win yont there--there's no outgate for a mouse."

"We will try," answered she; "it is perhaps not so bad as it
looks--Follow me--you have nothing to fear."

Walter followed; for however much he was affrighted for brownies, and
fairies, and dead corpses, and all these awful kind of things, he was no
coward among rocks and precipices. They soon reached a little dass in
the middle of the linn, or what an Englishman would call a small
landing-place. Here she paused till her father reached her, and pointed
out to him the singularity of their situation, with the burn roaring far
below their feet, and the rock fairly overhanging them above.

"Is it not a romantic and tremendous spot?" said she.

"It is that!" said Walter, "an' I believe you and I are the first that
ever stood on it."

"Well, this is the end of our journey," said she; and, turning about,
she began to pull at a bush of heath that grew between two rocks.

"What can she be gaun to do wi' the heather?" thought Walter to himself,
when instantly a door opened, and showed a cavern that led into the
hill. It was a door wattled with green heath, with the tops turned
outward so exactly, that it was impossible for any living to know but
that it was a bush of natural heath growing in the interstice. "Follow
me, my dear father," said she, "you have still nothing to fear;" and so
saying she entered swiftly in a stooping posture. Walter followed, but
his huge size precluded the possibility of his walking otherwise than on
all fours, and in that mode he fairly essayed to follow his mysterious
child; but the path winded--his daughter was quite gone--and the door
closed behind him, for it was so constructed as to fall to of itself,
and as Walter expressed it,--"There was he left gaun boring into the
hill like a moudiwort, in utter darkness." The consequence of all this
was, that Walter's courage fairly gave way, and, by an awkward
retrograde motion, he made all the haste he was able back to the light.
He stood on the shelve of the rock at the door for several minutes in
confused consternation, saying to himself, "What in the wide world is
com'd o' the wench? I believe she is gane away down into the pit bodily,
an' thought to wile me after her; or into the heart o' the hill, to some
enchantit cave, amang her brownies, an' fairies, an' hobgoblins. L----d
have a care o' me, gin ever I saw the like o' this!" Then losing
all patience, he opened the door, set in his head, and bellowed
out,--"Hollo, lassie!--What's com'd o' ye? Keatie Laidlaw--Holloa!" He
soon heard footsteps approaching, and took shelter behind the door, with
his back leaning to the rock, in case of any sudden surprise, but it was
only his daughter, who chided him gently for his timidity and want of
confidence in her, and asked how he could be frightened to go where a
silly girl, his own child, led the way? adding, that if he desired the
mystery that had so long involved her fate and behaviour to be cleared
up, he behoved to enter and follow her, or to remain in the dark for
ever. Thus admonished, Walter again screwed his courage to the
sticking-place, and entered in order to explore this mysterious cave,
following close to his daughter, who led him all the way by the collar
of the coat as he crept. The entrance was long and irregular, and in one
place very narrow, the roof being supported here and there by logs of
birch and alder. They came at length into the body of the cave, but it
was so dimly lighted from above, the vent being purposely made among
rough heath, which in part overhung and hid it from view without, that
Walter was almost in the middle of it ere ever he was aware, and still
creeping on his hands and knees. His daughter at last stopped short, on
which he lifted his eyes, and saw indistinctly the boundaries of the
cave, and a number of figures standing all around ready to receive him.
The light, as I said, entered straight from above, and striking on the
caps and bonnets which they wore on their heads, these shaded their
faces, and they appeared to our amazed goodman so many blackamoors, with
long shaggy beards and locks, and their garments as it were falling from
their bodies piece-meal. On the one side, right over against him, stood
a coffin, raised a little on two stones; and on the other side, on a
couch of rushes, lay two bodies that seemed already dead, or just in the
last stage of existence; and, at the upper end, on a kind of wicker
chair, sat another pale emaciated figure, with his feet and legs wrapt
up in flannel, a napkin about his head, and his body wrapped in an old
duffel cloak that had once belonged to Walter himself. Walter's vitals
were almost frozen up by the sight,--he uttered a hollow exclamation,
something like the beginning of a prayer, and attempted again to make
his escape, but he mistook the entrance, and groped against the dark
corner of the cavern. His daughter pulled him by the arm, intreating him
to stay, and addressing the inmates of that horrid den, she desired them
to speak to her father, and explain the circumstances of their case, for
he was still bewildered, and the scene was too much for him to bear.

"That we will do joyfully," said one, in a strong intelligent voice.

Walter turned his eyes on the speaker, and who was it but the redoubted
Brownie of Bodsbeck, so often mentioned before, in all his native
deformity; while the thing in the form of a broad bonnet that he wore on
his head, kept his features, grey locks and beard, wholly in the shade;
and, as he approached Walter, he appeared a being without any definitive
form or feature. The latter was now standing on his feet, with his back
leaned against the rock that formed the one side of the cave, and
breathing so loud, that every whiff sounded in the caverned arches like
the rush of the winter wind whistling through the crevices of the
casement.

Brownie approached him, followed by others.

"Be not alarmed, goodman," said the creature, in the same solemn and
powerful voice; "you see none here but fellow-creatures and
Christians--none who will not be happy to bestow on you their blessing,
and welcome you as a father."

He stretched forth his hand to take hold of our goodman's. It was bent
to his side as by a spasm, and at the same time a volley of breath came
forth from his capacious chest with such a rush, that it was actually
like the snort of a horse that is frightened in the dark. The Brownie,
however, laid hold of it, stiff as it was, and gave it a squeeze and a
hearty shake. "You are welcome, sir!" continued the shapeless mass, "to
our dismal habitation. May the God of Heaven particularly bless you in
your _family_ and in all your other concerns!"

The naming of this name dispelled Walter's wild apprehensions like a
charm, for though he was no devotee, yet his mind had a strong bias to
the superstitions of the country in which he was bred; therefore this
benediction, pronounced in such a tone of ardour and sublimity of
feeling, had a powerful effect on his mind. But the circumstance that
proved the most effective of all, was perhaps the sensible assurance
gained by the shaking of hands, that Brownie was really and truly a
corporeal being. Walter now held out his hand to all the rest as they
came forward one by one, and shook hands heartily with them all, while
every one of them blessed him in the name of their Maker or Redeemer.
Walter was still involved in mystery, and all this while he had never
uttered a word that any man could make meaning of; and after they had
all shook hands with him, he looked at the coffin; then at the figures
on the couch; then at the pale wretch on the wicker-seat, and then at
the coffin again.

"Let us fully understand one another," said Katharine. "Pray, Brown, be
so good as detail the circumstances of this party as shortly as you can
to my father, for, as is natural, he is still perplexed and bewildered."

"You see here before you, sir," said the little hunchbacked figure, "a
wretched remnant of that long persecuted, and now nearly annihilated
sect, the covenanted reformers of the west of Scotland. We were expelled
from our homes, and at last hunted from our native mountains like
wolves, for none of our friends durst shelter any of us on their
grounds, on pain of death. Even the rest of the persecuted disowned us,
and became our adversaries, because our tenets were more stern and
severe than theirs; for we acted on the principle of retaliation as far
as it lay in our power, holding that to be in consistency with the laws
of God and man; therefore were we expelled from their society, which
indeed we disdained.

"We first came to Bodsbeck, where we got shelter for a few weeks. It was
there that I was first supposed by the menials, who chanced to see me,
to be a Brownie, and that superstitious idea the tenant thought meet to
improve for our safety; but on the approach of Lag's people he dismissed
us. We then fled to Leithenhall, from whence in a few days we were again
compelled to fly; and at last came to this wild, the only place in the
south that soldiers had never searched, nor could search with any degree
of success. After much labour we completed this cave, throwing the stuff
into the torrent below, so that the most minute investigator could not
distinguish the smallest difference in the linn, or face of the
precipice; and here we deemed we might live for years without being
discovered; and here we determined to live, till God should see fit, in
his own good time, to send some relief to his persecuted church in these
lands.

"But alas, the worst evil of all awaited us! We subsisted for a
considerable time by bringing victuals over night from a great distance,
but even the means of obtaining these failed us; so that famine, and the
dampness of the air here, we being compelled to lie inactive in the
bowels of the earth for days and nights together, brought on us a
malignant and pestilential fever. In three days from its first symptoms
appearing, one half of our number were lying unable to move, or lift an
eye. What could we do? The remnant could not fly, and leave their sick
and wounded brethren to perish here unseen. We were unable to carry them
away with us, and if we had, we had no place to which we could have
conveyed them. We durst not apply to you, for if you had taken pity on
us, we knew it would cost you your life, and be the means of bereaving
your family of all your well-earned wealth. In this great extremity, as
a last resource, I watched an opportunity, and laid our deplorable case
before that dear maid your daughter--Forgive these tears, sir; you see
every eye around fills at mention of her name--She has been our guardian
angel--She has, under Almighty Providence, saved the lives of the whole
party before you--has supplied us with food, cordials, and medicines;
with beds, and with clothing, all from her own circumscribed resources.
For us she has braved every danger, and suffered every privation; the
dereliction of her parents, and the obloquy of the whole country. That
young man, whom you see sitting on the wicker chair there, is my only
surviving son of five--he was past hope when she found him--fast posting
to the last gaol--her unwearied care and attentions have restored him;
he is again in a state of convalescence--O may the Eternal God reward
her for what she has done to him and us!

"Only one out of all the distressed and hopeless party has perished, he
whose body lies in that coffin. He was a brave, noble, and pious youth,
and the son of a worthy gentleman. When our dear nurse and physician
found your house deserted by all but herself, she took him home to a bed
in that house, where she attended him for the last seven days of his
life with more than filial care. He expired last night at midnight, amid
our prayers and supplications to heaven in his behalf, while that dear
saint supported his head in his dying moments, and shed the tear of
affliction over his lifeless form. She made the grave-clothes from her
own scanty stock of linen--tied her best lawn napkin round the head;
and"----

Here Walter could contain himself no longer; he burst out a crying, and
sobbed like a child.

"An' has my Keatie done a' this?" cried he, in a loud broken voice--"Has
my woman done a' this, an' yet me to suspect her, an' be harsh till her?
I might hae kend her better!" continued he, taking her in his arms, and
kissing her cheek again and again. "But she sall hae ten silk gowns, an'
ten satin anes, for the bit linen she has bestowed on sic an occasion,
an' a' that she has wared on ye I'll make up to her a hunder an' fifty
fauld."

"O my dear father," said she, "you know not what I have suffered for
fear of having offended you; for I could not forget that their
principles, both civil and religious, were the opposite of yours--that
they were on the adverse side to you and my mother, as well as the
government of the country."

"Deil care what side they war on, Kate!" cried Walter, in the same
vehement voice; "ye hae taen the side o' human nature; the suffering and
the humble side, an' the side o' feeling, my woman, that bodes best in a
young unexperienced thing to tak. It is better than to do like yon bits
o' gillflirts about Edinburgh; poor shilly-shally milk-an'-water things!
Gin ye but saw how they cock up their noses at a whig, an' thraw their
bits o' gabs; an' downa bide to look at aught, or hear tell o' aught,
that isna i' the top fashion. Ye hae done very right, my good
lassie--od, I wadna gie ye for the hale o' them, an' they war a' hung in
a strap like ingans."

"Then, father, since you approve I am happy. I have no care now save for
these two poor fellows on that couch, who are yet far from being out of
danger."

"L----d sauf us!" said Walter, turning about, "I thought they had been twa
dead corpse. But now, when my een are used to the light o' the place, I
see the chaps _are_ living, an' no that unlife-like, as a body may say."

He went up to them, spoke to them kindly, took their wan bleached sinewy
hands in his, and said, he feared they were still very ill?

"Better than we have been," was the reply--"Better than we have been,
goodman. Thanks to you and yours."

"Dear father," said Katharine, "I think if they were removed down to
Chapelhope, to dry comfortable lodgings, and had more regular diet, and
better attendance, their health might soon be re-established. Now that
you deem the danger over, will you suffer me to have them carried down
there?"

"Will I no, Kate? My faith, they shall hae the twa best beds i' the
house, if Maron an' me should sleep in the barn! An' ye sal hae naething
ado but to attend them, an' nurse them late an' aire; an' I'll gar Maron
Linton attend them too, an' she'll rhame o'er bladds o' scripture to
them, an' they'll soon get aboon this bit dwam. Od, if outher gude fare
or drogs will do it, I'll hae them playin' at the pennystane wi' Davie
Tait, an' prayin' wi' him at night, in less than twa weeks."

"Goodman," said old Brown, (for this celebrated Brownie was no other
than the noted Mr John Brown, the goodman of Caldwell)--"Goodman, well
may you be proud this day, and well may you be uplifted in heart on
account of your daughter. The more I see and hear of her, the more am I
struck with admiration; and I am persuaded of this, that, let your past
life have been as it may, the Almighty will bless and prosper you on
account of that maid. The sedateness of her counsels, and the qualities
of her heart, have utterly astonished me--She has all the strength of
mind, and energy of the bravest of men, blent with all the softness,
delicacy, and tenderness of femininity--Neither danger nor distress can
overpower her mind for a moment--tenderness does it at once. If ever an
angel appeared on earth in the form of woman, it is in that of your
daughter"--

"I wish ye wad haud your tongue," said Walter, who stood hanging his
head, and sobbing aloud. The large tears were not now dropping from his
eyes--they were trickling in torrents. "I wish ye wad haud your tongue,
an' no mak me ower proud o' her. She's weel eneugh, puir woman----It's
a--It's a shame for a great muckle auld fool like me to be booin an'
greetin like a bairn this gate!--but deil tak the doer gin I can help
it!--I watna what's ta'en me the day!--She's weel eneugh, puir lassie.
I daresay I never learned her ony ill, but I little wat where she has
gotten a' the gude qualities ye brag sae muckle o', unless it hae been
frae Heaven in gude earnest; for I wat weel, she has been brought up but
in a ramstamphish hamely kind o' way wi' Maron an' me.--But come, come!
let us hae done wi' this fuffing an' blawing o' noses, an' making o' wry
faces. Row the twa puir sick lads weel up, an' bring them down in the
bed-claes to my house. An' d'ye hear, callants--gudesake get your beards
clippit or shaven a wee, an' be something warld like, an' come a' down
to Chapelhope; I'll kill the best wedder on the Hermon-Law, an' we shall
a' dine heartily thegither for aince; I'll get ower Davie Tait to say
the grace, an' we'll be as merry as the times will allow."

They accepted the invitation, with many expressions of gratitude and
thankfulness, and the rays of hope once more enlightened the dejected
countenances that had so long been overshadowed with the gloom of
despair.

"But there's ae thing, callants," said Walter, "that has astonished me,
an' I canna help speering. Where got ye the coffin sae readily for the
man that died last night?"

"That coffin," said Brown, "was brought here one night by the friends of
one of the men whom Clavers caused to be shot on the other side of the
ridge there, which you saw. The bodies were buried ere they came; it
grew day on them, and they left it; so, for the sake of concealment, we
brought it into our cave. It has been useful to us; for when the
wretched tinker fell down among us from that gap, while we were at
evening worship, we pinioned him in the dark, and carried him in that
chest to your door, thinking he had belonged to your family. That led to
a bloody business, of which you shall hear anon. And in that coffin,
too, we carried off your ungrateful curate so far on his journey,
disgraced for ever, to come no more within twenty miles of Chapelhope,
on pain of a dreadful death in twenty-four hours thereafter; and I
stand warrandice that he shall keep his distance. In it we have now
deposited the body of a beloved and virtuous friend, who always foretold
this, from its first arrival in our cell.--But he rejoiced in the
prospect of his dissolution, and died as he had lived, a faithful and
true witness; and his memory shall long be revered by all the just and
the good."




CHAPTER V.


I hate long explanations, therefore this chapter shall be very short;
there are, however, some parts of the foregoing tale, which require that
a few words should be subjoined in elucidation of them.

This John Brown was a strenuous and desperate reformer. He was the son
of a gentleman by a second marriage, and half-brother to the Laird of
Caldwells. He was at the battle of Pentland, with five brave sons at his
back, two of whom were slain in the action, and he himself wounded. He
was again at Bothwell Bridge with the remaining three, where he was a
principal mover of the unhappy commotions in the army that day, owing to
his violent irreclaimable principles of retaliation. A little before
the rout became general, he was wounded by a musket bullet, which grazed
across his back, and deprived him of all power. A dragoon coming up, and
seeing him alive, struck him again across the back with his sword, which
severed the tendons, and cut him to the bone. His sons had seen him
fall, and, knowing the spot precisely, they returned overnight, and
finding him still alive, they conveyed him to a place of safety, and
afterwards to Glasgow, where he remained concealed in a garret in a
friend's house for some months; and, after great sufferings in body and
mind, recovered of his wounds; but, for want of surgical assistance, he
was so crooked and bowed down, that his nearest friends could not know
him; for in his youth, though short in stature, he was strong and
athletic. At length he reached his own home, but found it ransacked and
desolate, and learned that his wife was carried to prison, he knew not
whether. His powerful eloquence, and wild Cameronian principles, made
him much dreaded by the other party; a high reward was offered for
apprehending him, so that he was driven to great straits, yet never
failed to wreak his vengeance on all of the persecuting party that fell
within his power, and he had still a number of adherents.

At length there was one shot in the fields near Kirkconnel that was
taken for him, and the promised reward actually paid; on which the
particular search after him subsided. His two youngest sons both died
for the same cause with the former, but James, his third son, always
kept by his father, until taken prisoner by Clavers as he was fishing
one day in Coulter Water. Clavers ordered him to be instantly shot, but
the Laird of Coulteralloes being present, interceded for him, and he was
detained a prisoner, carried about from place to place, and at length
confined in the gaol at Selkirk. By the assistance of his father and
friends he effected his escape, but not before being grievously wounded;
and, by reason of the hurts he received, and the fever that attacked
them in the cave, when Katharine was first introduced there, he was
lying past hope; but, by her unwearied care and attention, he, with
others, was so far recovered as to be able to sit up, and walk about a
little. He was poor Nanny's own son; and this John was her husband, whom
she had long deemed in another and a happier state--No wonder that she
was shocked and affrighted when she saw him again in such a form at
midnight, and heard him speak in his own natural and peculiar voice.
Their meeting that day at Chapelhope must be left to the imagination; it
is impossible for any pen to do it justice.

It is only necessary to add, that Walter seems to have been as much
respected and beloved by his acquaintances and domestics, at least as
any neighbour or master of the present day, as will appear from the few
following remarks. The old session-clerk and precentor at Ettrick said,
"It was the luckiest thing that could have happened that he had come
home again, for the poor's ladle had been found to be a pund Scots short
every Sunday since he and his family had left church." And fat Sandy
Cunningham, the conforming clergyman there, a very honest inoffensive
man, remarked, "that he was very glad to hear the news, for the goodman
always gave the best dinners at the visitations and examinations of any
farmer in his parish; and one always felt so comfortable in his house."
Davie Tait said, that "Divine Providence had just been like a stell dike
to the goodman. It had bieldit him frae the bitter storm o' the
adversary's wrath, an' keepit a' the thunner-bolts o' the wicked frae
brikking on his head; that, for his part, he wad sit down on his knees
an' thank Heaven, Sunday and Saturday, for his return, for he could
easily lend his master as muckle siller as wad stock a' Riskinhope ower
again, an' there was little doubt but he wad do it." Even old John of
the Muchrah remarked, "that it was just as weel that his master was
come back, for he had an unco gude e'e amang the sheep when ought was
gaun wrang on the hill, an' the ewes wadna win nae mair into the hogg
fence o' the Quave Brae, i' the day time at ony rate."

If there are any incidents in this Tale that may still appear a little
mysterious, they will all be rendered obvious by turning to a pamphlet,
entitled, A CAMERONIAN'S TALE, or _The Life of John Brown, written by
himself_. But any reader of common ingenuity may very easily solve them
all.

END OF THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK.




THE WOOL-GATHERER.

MODERN.




Love is a passion so capricious, so violent, and so productive of
whimsical expedients, that there is no end of its varieties. Dramas may
be founded, plots arranged, and novels written on the subject, yet the
simple truth itself generally outlasts them all. The following story,
which relates to an amiable family still existing, is so like a romance,
that perhaps the word of a narrator is insufficient to stamp it with
that veracity to which it is entitled. The principal incidents, however,
are set down precisely as they were related to me; only I have deemed it
meet to change the designations of the individuals, so far that they
cannot be recognised by any one not previously acquainted with the
circumstances.

The late Laird of Earlhall dying in the fiftieth year of his age, as his
grave-stone intimates, left behind him a widow, and two sons both in
their minority. The eldest was of a dashing impatient character--he had
a kind and affectionate heart, but his actions were not always tempered
with prudence. He entered at an early age into the army, and fell in the
Peninsular War when scarcely twenty-two years of age. The estate thus
devolved wholly on the youngest, whose name for the present shall be
Lindsey, that being his second Christian name, and the one by which his
mother generally called him. He had been intended for the law, but on
his brother's death gave up the study as too laborious for his easy and
careless disposition. He was attached to literature; and after his
return home his principal employment consisted in poring over his books,
and managing a little flower-garden in which he took great delight. He
was studious, absent, and sensible, but paid little attention to his
estate, or the extensive farm which he himself occupied.

The old lady, who was a stirring, talkative, industrious dame,
entertained him constantly with long lectures on the ill effects of
idleness. She called it the _blight_ of youth, the _grub_ of virtue, and
the _mildew_ of happiness; and sometimes, when roused into energy, she
said it was _the devil's langsettle_ on which he plotted all his devices
against human weal. Lindsey bore all with great patience, but still
continued his easy and indolent way.

The summer advanced--the weather became peculiarly fine--labourers were
busy in every field, and the shepherd's voice, and the bleating of his
flocks, sounded from the adjacent mountains by break of day. This lively
and rousing scene gave a new edge to the old lady's remonstrances; they
came upon poor Lindsey thicker and faster, like the continued dropping
of a rainy day, until he was obliged in some degree to yield. He tried
to reason the matter with her, in somewhat near to the following words;
but there, lawyer as he was, he had no chance. He was fairly overcome.

"My dear mother," said he, "what does all this signify?--Or what is it
that I can effect by my superintendance? Our farmers are all doing well,
and pay their rents regularly; and as for our farm-servants, they have
each of them filled the same situation so long and so creditably, that I
feel quite awkward when standing looking over them,--it looks as if I
suspected their integrity, which has been so often proved. Besides, it
is a leading maxim with me, that if a man, and more particularly a
woman, know or believe that trust is reposed in them, they will, in ten
out of eleven instances, deserve it; but if once they see that they are
suspected, the feeling towards you is changed, and they will in a little
time as likely deserve the one as the other. Our wealth is annually
increasing, at least as fast as necessary, and it is my principal wish,
that every one under us may be as easy and comfortable as possible."

This was true, for the old lady being parsimonious in the extreme, their
riches had increased rapidly since the death of the late laird. As for
Lindsey, he never spent any thing, save some trifle that he laid out
yearly in payment of Reviews, and new books, and in relieving some poor
families in the neighbourhood. The article of dress he left entirely to
his mother: Whatever she bought or made for him he approved of, and
whatever clothes or linen she laid down in his chamber, he put on
without any observations. He acted upon the same principle with regard
to his meals, but he sometimes was obliged to insist on a little
addition being made to the comforts of the family servants, all of whom
loved him as a friend and benefactor. He could at any time have swayed
his mother so far as to make her a little more liberal towards the
men-servants, but with regard to the maids he had no such power. She and
they lived at constant variance,--an irreconcileable jealousy seemed
always to subsist between them, and woe to them if the young laird
interested himself in their favour! Matters being in this state, he was
obliged to witness this mutual animosity; this tyranny on the one hand,
and discontent on the other, without having the power to amend it.

"But then, my dear Lindsey," returned she to his former remonstrance,
"making allowance for a' that you say--allowing that your weel-spoken
arguments are a' foundit in truth, for laith wad you be to say an
untruth, an' I never heard an argument that wasna sound come out o' your
mouth,--but then I say, what's to hinder you to gang a fishing like
other gentlemen, or shooting moor-cocks, an' paetricks, an' black-cocks,
as a' ither countrymen o' your age an' station do? Some manly exercise
in the field is absolutely necessary to keep your form robust, your
colour fresh, and your mind active; an', indeed, you maunna be
discontentit, nor displeased, if I insist on it, while the weather is so
fine."

"With regard to fowling, my dear mother, I am perfectly ignorant; I know
nothing about the sport, and I never can delight in it, for often has it
given me pain to see others pursuing it. I think the pleasure arising
from it can scarcely originate in any thing else than a principle of
cruelty. Fishing is little better. I never regret the killing of an ox,
or sheep, by which we have so much necessary food for our life, but I
think it hard to take a precious life for a single mouthful."

"His presence be about us! Lindsey! what's that ye say? Wha heard ever
tell of a trout's precious life? Or a salmon's precious life? Or a ged's
precious life? Wow, man, but sma' things are precious i' your een! Or
wha can feel for a trout? A cauldrife creature that has nae feeling
itsel; a greedy grampus of a thing, that worries its ain kind, an' eats
them whenever it can get a chance. Na, na, Lindsey, let me hear nae mair
o' sickan lang-nebbit fine-spun arguments; but do take your father's
rod, like a man, and a gentleman, and gang a fishing, if it were but an
hour in the day; there are as many hooks and lines in the house as will
serve you for seven years to come; an' it is weel kend how plenty the
trouts are in your ain water. I hae seen the day when we never wanted
plenty o' them at this time o' the year."

"Well, well," said Lindsey, taking up a book, "I shall go to please you,
but I would rather be at home."

She rung the bell, and ordered in old John the barnman, one well skilled
in the art of angling. "John," said she, "put your master's fishing-rod
and tackle in order, he is going a fishing at noon."

John shrugged up his shoulders when he heard of his master's intent, as
much as to say, "sic a fisher as he'll mak!" however, he went away in
silence, and the order was quickly obeyed.

Thus equipt, away trudged Lindsay to the fishing for the first time in
his life; slowly and indifferently he went, and began at the first pool
he came to. John offered to accompany him, to which he assented, but
this the old lady resisted, and bid him go to his work; he, however,
watched his master's motions slyly for some time, and on joining his
fellow labourers remarked, that "his master was a real saft hand at the
fishing."

An experienced angler certainly would have been highly amused at his
procedure. He pulled out the line, and threw it in again so fast, that
he appeared more like one threshing corn than angling; he, moreover,
fixed always upon the smoothest parts of the stream, where no trout in
his right senses could possibly be inveigled. But the far greater part
of his employment consisted in loosening the hook from different objects
with which it chanced to come in contact. At one time he was to be seen
stooping to the arm-pits in the middle of the water, disengaging it from
some officious twig that had intercepted its progress; at another time
on the top of a tree tearing off a branch on which it had laid hold. A
countryman happening to pass by just as he stood stripped to the shirt
cutting it out of his clothes, in which it had fastened behind,
observed, by way of friendly remark, that "they were fashous things them
hooks." Lindsey answered, that "they certainly had a singular knack of
catching hold of things."

He went through all this without being in the least disconcerted, or
showing any impatience; and towards dinner-time, the trouts being
abundant, and John having put on a fly that answered the weather, he
caught some excellent fish, and might have caught many more had he been
diligent; but every trout that he brought ashore took him a long time to
contemplate. He surveyed his eye, his mouth, and the structure of his
gills with tedious curiosity; then again laid him down, and fixed his
eyes on him in deep and serious meditation.

The next day he needed somewhat less persuasion from his mother to try
the same amusement; still it was solely to please her that he went, for
about the sport itself he was quite careless. Away he set the second
day, and prudently determined to go farther up the water, as he supposed
that part to be completely emptied of fish where he had been the day
before. He sauntered on in his usual thoughtful and indifferent mood,
sometimes throwing in his line without any manner of success. At length,
on going over an abrupt ridge, he came to a clear pool where the farmers
had lately been washing their flocks, and by the side of it a most
interesting female, apparently not exceeding seventeen years of age,
gathering the small flakes of wool in her apron that had fallen from the
sheep in washing; while, at the same time, a beautiful well-dressed
child, about two years old, was playing on the grass. Lindsey was close
beside her before any of them were aware, and it is hard to say which of
the two were most surprised. She blushed like scarlet, but pretended to
gather on, as if wishing he would pass without taking any notice of
them; but Lindsey was rivetted to the spot; he had never in his life
seen any woman half so beautiful, and at the same time her array
accorded with the business in which she was engaged. Her form was the
finest symmetry; her dark hair was tucked up behind with a comb, and
hung waving in ringlets over her cheeks and brow, "like shadows on the
mountain snow;" and there was an elegance in the model of her features,
arms, and hands, that the youth believed he had never before seen
equalled in any lady, far less a country girl.

"What are you going to do with that wretched stuff, lassie?" said
Lindsey; "it has been trampled among the clay and sand, and is unfit for
any human use."

"It will easily clean again, sir," said she, in a frank and cheerful
voice, "and then it will be as good as ever."

"It looks very ill; I am positive it is for no manner of use."

"It is certainly, as you say, not of great value, sir; but if it is of
any, I may as well lift it as let it lie and rot here."

"Certainly, there can be no harm in it; only I am sorry to see such a
girl at such an employment."

"It is better doing this than nothing," was the reply.

The child now rolled himself over to get his face turned towards them;
and, fixing his large blue eyes on Lindsey, looked at him with the
utmost seriousness. The latter observing a striking likeness between the
girl and the child, had no doubt that she was his sister; and, unwilling
to drop the conversation, he added, abruptly enough, "Has your mother
sent you to gather that stuff?"

"I have neither father nor mother, sir."

"But one who supplies both their places, I hope. You have a husband,
have not you?"

"Not as yet, sir; but there is no time lost."

She blushed; but Lindsey coloured ten times deeper when he cast his eyes
upon the child. His heart died within him at the thoughts that now
obtruded themselves; it was likewise wrung for his imprudence and
indelicacy. What was his business whether she was married or not, or how
she was connected with the child? She seemed likewise to be put into
some confusion at the turn the conversation was taking; and, anxious to
bring it to a conclusion as soon as possible, she tucked up the wool in
her apron below one arm, and was lifting up the child with the other to
go away, when Lindsey stepped forward, saying, "Will not you shake hands
with me, my good little fellow, before you go?"

"Ay," said the child, stretching out his little chubby hand; "how d'ye
doo, sil?"

Lindsay smiled, shook his hand heartily, and put a crown piece into it.

"Ah, sir, don't give him that," said she, blushing deeply.

"It is only a play-thing that he must keep for my sake."

"Thank you, sil," said the child. "Great muckle shilling, mamma."

This last appellation, _mamma_, struck Lindsey motionless;--he had not
another word to say;--while the two went away prattling to one another.

"Vely lalge fine-looking shilling, mamma."

"Ay, it is a very bonny shilling, dear," said she, kissing him, and
casting a parting look at the petrified fisher.

"Mamma, mamma!" repeated Lindsey to himself an hundred times, trying it
with every modulation of his voice. "This is the most extraordinary
circumstance I ever witnessed. Now, who in the world can comprehend that
thing called woman?--Who would not have sworn that that rural beauty
there was the most pure, innocent, and untainted of her sex?--And yet,
behold! she has a fine boy running at her side, and calling her
_mamma_!--Poor girl, is she not to be pitied?--When one thinks how some
tender parent might rejoice over her, anticipating so much better things
of her! It is plain she has been very indifferently used by the
world--most cruelly used--and is she the less interesting on that
account? I wish I knew how to make her some amends."

Thus reasoned our moral fisher with himself, keeping all the while a
sidelong glance towards her, till he saw her enter a little neat
white-washed cottage not far from the side of the stream; there were
sundry other houses inhabited by cottagers in the hamlet, and the
farm-house stood at the head of the cluster. The ground belonged to
Lindsey, and the farmer was a quiet sober man, a widower, with a large
family. Lindsey now went up the water a-fishing every day; and though he
often hovered a considerable while at the washing-pool, and about the
crook opposite to the cot, pretending all the while to be extremely busy
fishing, he could never get another sight of the lovely Wool-gatherer,
though he desired it above all present earthly things; for, some way
or other, he felt that he _pitied_ her exceedingly; and though he
was not greatly _interested_ in her, yet he was very much so in the
_child_--he was _certain it was the child_ that interested him so
much--nevertheless, he was sorry too on account of the mother, for she
seemed _very gentle_, and _very amiable_, and must have been abominably
used; and therefore he could not help feeling _very sorry for her
indeed_, as well as deeply _interested in the child_. On the second and
third day that he went up, little George came out paddling to meet him
at the water side, on which he always sent him in again with a fish in
one hand, and some little present in the other; but after that, he
appeared no more, which Lindsey easily perceived to originate in the
Wool-gatherer's diffidence and modesty, who could not bear the idea of
her little man receiving such gifts.

The same course was continued for many days, and always with the same
success, as far as regarded the principal motive, for the trouts were
only a secondary one--the beauteous Wool-gatherer was thenceforward
invisible. After three weeks perseverance, it chanced to come on a heavy
rain one day when he was but a little way above the farm-house. Robin
the farmer, expecting that he would fly into his house until the shower
abated, was standing without his own door to receive him; but he kept
aloof, passed by, and took shelter in the Wool-gatherer's cottage;
though not without some scruples of conscience as to the prudence of the
step he was taking. When he went in she was singing a melodious Scotch
air, and plying at her wheel. "What a thoughtless creature she must be,"
said he to himself; "and how little conscious of the state to which she
has fallen." He desired her to go on with her song, but she quitted both
that and her wheel instantly, set a chair for him, and sitting down on a
low form herself, lighted sticks on the fire to warm and dry him, at the
same time speaking and looking with the utmost cheerfulness, and
behaving with all that ease and respect as if she had been his equal,
and an old intimate acquaintance. He had a heart of the greatest
integrity, and this was the very manner that delighted him; and indeed
he felt that he was delighted in the highest degree by this fair
mystery. He would gladly have learned her story, but durst not hint at
such a thing for fear of giving her pain, and he had too much delicacy
to enquire after her at any other person, or even to mention her name.
He observed that though there was but little furniture in the house, yet
it was not in the least degree like any other he had ever seen in such a
cottage, and seemed very lately to have occupied a more respectable
situation. Little George was mounching at a lump of dry bread, making
very slow progress. He kept his eyes fixed on his benefactor, but said
nothing for a considerable time, till at length he observed him sitting
silent as in pleasing contemplation; he then came forward with a bounce
upon his knee, and smiled up in his face, as much as to say, "You are
not minding little George?"

"Ah, my dear little fellow, are you there? Will you have a muckle
shilling of me to-day?"

"Na, na; be vely solly. Mamma quite angly. She scold me."

"Well, but since you have never come to help me to catch the fish for so
long a time, I will only give you a very little one to-day."

"Dear sir, if you would not distress me, don't mind him; he is a little
impudent fellow.--Go off from the gentleman, George."

George clapped both his hands upon his head, and went back without
hesitation, gloomed at his mamma, and took again up his luncheon of dry
bread.

"Nay, pardon me," continued Lindsey; "but you must always suffer me to
give my little new acquaintance something." So saying, he put a guinea
into the child's hand.

"Hank you, sil," said George,--"O no be angy, mamma--only ittle wee
half-penny--ook ye, mamma."

"Oh sir," said she, "you distress me by these presents. I have no need
of money, and what can he do with it but throw it away?"

"Nay, nay; pray don't notice it; that is nothing between two friends
like George and me."

Lindsey dried himself; talked of indifferent matters, and then took the
child on his knee and talked to him. The conversation had as yet been as
free and unrestrained as possible, but Lindsey, by a blunder quite
natural to a studious and absent man, cut it short at once. "Tell me
your name, good lad?" said he to the child. "Let me hear you say your
name?"

"Geoge," was the reply.

"But what more than George? Tell me what they call you more than
George?"

"Just Geoge, sil. Mamma's Geoge."

"Pray, what is my young friend's surname?" said Lindsey, with the
greatest simplicity.

The Wool-gatherer stooped to the floor as if lifting something, in order
that she might keep her face out of the light; two or three times an
answer seemed trembling on her tongue, but none came. There was a dead
silence in the cot, which none had the courage to break. How our
unfortunate fisher's heart smote him! He meant only to confer happiness,
in place of which he had given unnecessary pain and confusion. The
shower was past; he arose abruptly, said, "Goodb'ye, I will call and see
my little George to-morrow," and home he went, more perplexed than ever,
and not overmuch pleased with himself. But the thing that astonished
him most of all was, the chearful serenity of her countenance and
manners under such grievous misfortunes. He did not know whether to
blame or approve of her for this; however, he continued to go up the
water for the most part every day, and seldom failed to call at the cot.
He meant no ill--he was certain he meant no harm to any one--it was only
to _see the child_ that he went, and why should any man be ashamed to go
and see a child? Very well reasoned, gentle fisher! but beware that this
is not the reverse of what you feel within. At all events, it is the
world that must judge of your actions and mine, not we ourselves.
Scandal is a busy vixen, and none can make fame fly so fast on an errand
as she.

Robin, the farmer, was hurt in the tenderest part that day when his
laird went by his door, and took shelter in the Wool-gatherer's cot;
and, on going in, he mentioned it in such a way, that his old maiden
sister, Meg, took note of it, and circulated it among the men-servants,
with strong injunctions of secrecy. The continuation of his visits
confirmed their worst suspicions: It was now no longer a matter of doubt
with them what was going on, but an obvious certainty. The shameful and
sudden attachment was blabbed from tongue to tongue, until every ear in
the parish had drunk the delicious draught, save those of the parties
implicated, and the old lady, the original cause of all. When he was
seen go into the cot, an event that was strictly watched, the lasses
would smile to each other,--the plowmen broke jests upon it,--and Meg
would hold up both her hands and say,--"Hech wow, sirs! I wonder what
our young gentles will turn to by an' by. It winna be lang till marriage
be out o' the fashion a' thegither, an' the fock that pretend to be
Christians a' living through other like the wild Tartarers."

Little wist the old lady of what was going on! She dreamed not once of a
beautiful stranger among the cottagers at Todburn (the name of Robin's
farm), that was working such deray, else woe would have been to her and
all concerned; for there was nothing short of the sin not to be
forgiven, that she dreaded so much as her son forming any attachment or
connection with the country maidens. She had been congratulating herself
mightily on the success of her expedient, in making him take such
delight in a manly and healthful exercise, and one which led him
insensibly to be acquainted with his people, and every part of his
estate. She had even been boasting aloud of it to every one with whom
she conversed; indeed her conversation with others was mostly about her
son, for he being her only surviving child, she loved him with her whole
heart, and her cares were all for him.

It happened one day that a little pert girl had come down from one of
the cottages at Todburn to buy some milk, which the lady supplied to
them from her dairy, and while skimming and measuring it, she fell into
conversation with this little sly and provoking imp.

"Did you see my son fishing in the water as you came down?"

"Na, na, mim; he was safe landit or I came away. He was fishing wi'
Hoy's net."

"Safe landit? Fishing wi' Hoy's net?--How do you mean?"

"He was gane in to tak a rest, mim,--that's a'."

"Oh, that was a'--was it? I'm glad to hear o' that. I never knew he had
called upon his tenants, or looked after them at all!"

"I trow he disna look muckle after them, mim. He's keener o' lookin'
after something else."

"Oh ay, the trouts! To be sure they hae almaist gane between him an' his
wits for some time; but he'll aye be seeing something o' his land, an'
something o' his fock. It was I that perswaded him to it. There are some
lucky hits in life."

"Ay, an' some lucky misses too, mim, that some think he likes as weel."

"He's sae tender-hearted, I believe he may be as happy oft to miss the
fish as to hit them; but that will soon wear away, as I tell him. He's
tender-hearted to a fault."

"An' there's mae tender-heartit nor him. There's some other kind o'
misses forbye trouts up the water."

"What is it you say?"

"I'll say nae mair about it--ane may very easily speak muckle nonsense."

"Didna ye say that my son was gane into Robin's house afore ye came
away?"

"I never said sic a word, begging your pardon, mim. He wadna gang into
Robin's, though it war raining auld wives and Jeddart staves."

"What house was he gone into then?"

"Into Jeany's, mim."

"Jeany's! What Jeany?"

"I dinna ken what they ca' her mair than Jeany. Little George's mother,
ye ken, that lives at the head o' the Washing-green."

"Jeany!--Little George's mother!--That lives at the head o' the
Washing-green!--Wha is she? Where comes she frae? Has she a husband?"

"Na, na, mim--nae husband."

The lady breathed as short as if in the heat of a fever--hasted out to
the air, and then returned with equal haste into the house, without
being able to accomplish any thing, for her hands trembled like the
aspin leaf; and, finally, after ordering the girl to send Robin down to
her immediately, she took to her bed, and lay brooding over the great
calamity of her son's shameful attachment. These low-bred women were her
bane; especially if they were beautiful, she loathed, she hated, and, if
she could, would have cleared the country of them. This, therefore, was
a great trial; and before Robin arrived, she had made out to herself a
picture of as many disagreeable objects as ever a distempered
imagination conceived. Instead of a genteel respected wife, the head of
a lovely family, a disgraceful connection, and an illegitimate
offspring! Ills followed on ills, a dreadful train! She could think of
nothing else, and the more she thought of it the worse did the
consequences appear. Before her messenger _reached_ Robin, she had
regularly determined on the young woman's dismissal from the estate,
and, if possible, from the district.

We shall pass over a long conversation that took place between the old
dame and Robin. It was maintained with great bitterness on the one hand,
and servility on the other; but the final resolution was, that Jane
should be ordered to depart from Todburn that night, or early the next
morning; and if she refused, Robin was to bribe her to a compliance with
any moderate sum of money, rather than that she should be suffered to
remain longer; for the lady sagely observed, she might corrupt and lead
astray all the young men in the country side, and would likely, at the
long run, cost the parish more than if it were to maintain a company of
soldiers. Last of all, it was decreed that their proceedings should be
kept a profound secret from Lindsey.

Robin went home; and waiting upon Jane, told her abruptly to prepare for
her immediate departure from the house that she occupied, for that she
could not be longer there; and that he would be answerable for her
furniture until she sent for it, or otherwise disposed of it; that she
needed not to ask any questions as to his motives, for that he was
obliged to do as he did, and the thing was decided that she was not to
remain longer there.

She answered not a word; but, with the tears in her eyes, and many a
half-smothered sob, she packed up a small bundle of clothes, and, taking
that below her arm and little George on her back, she went away, having
first locked the door and given the key to the farmer. "Farewell,
Robin," said she; "you are turning two very helpless and friendless
creatures out to the open fields; but think you, you may not rue this on
a day when you cannot help it?"

Robin was affected, but he was obliged to do as he was desired, and
therefore made no defence, but said simply, "Farewell! Farewell!--God
help thee, poor thing!"--He then kept an eye on her, that she might not
communicate with any of the rest until she was fairly across the end of
the Todburn-Law, and he was agreeably surprised at seeing her take that
direction.

As soon as she got out of sight of her late dwelling, she sought a
retired spot by the side of a clear mountain rivulet, where she sat down
and gave free vent to her tears. "My poor child," said she, clasping
little George to her breast, "what is now to become of us, and where
will our sorrows terminate? Here we are turned out on the wide world,
and have neither house nor home to cover our heads; we have no bed now,
George, but the cold earth, and no covering but that sky that you see
over us."

"O no geet, mamma--no geet; Geoge vely wae," said the child, clasping
her neck in return, and sobbing aloud; "no geet, else Geoge tuln bad
child, and geet too."

"No, for your sake, my dear, I will not greet; therefore cheer up thy
little kind heart, for there is One who will provide for us still, and
will not suffer two helpless inexperienced beings like you and I to
perish."

"Geoge like 'at man."

"It is no man that we must now depend on, my dear; we must depend on
God, who will never forsake us."

"Geoge like God."

Here she kissed him and wept anew, yet was all the while trying to
console him. "Let us be of good cheer, George; while I have health I
will work for you, for you have no one else on earth that cares for
you."

"But no geet, mamma, I tell you; Geoge wulk too. When Geoge tuln geat
big man, Geoge wulk mole 'an two mans."

Here their tender prattle was interrupted by a youth named Barnaby, who
was close at their side before they observed him. He was one of Robin's
servants, who herded a few young sheep at the back of the hill where
Jane was sitting. He was fifteen years of age, tall and thin, but had
fine features, somewhat pitted with the small-pox. He had an
inexhaustible fund of good-humour and drollery, and playing the fool
among the rest of the servants to keep them laughing was his chiefest
delight; but his folly was all affected, and the better part of his
character lay concealed behind the screen of a fantastic exterior. He
never mended his clothes like the rest of the servant lads, but suffered
them to fall into as many holes as they inclined; when any expostulated
with him on the subject, he said, "he likit them nae the waur o' twa or
three holes to let in the air;" and, in truth, he was as ragged a youth
as one would see in a summer day. His hat was remarkably broad-brimmed
and supple, and hung so far over his eyes, that, when he looked any
person in the face, he had to take the same position as if looking at a
vertical star. This induced him often, when he wanted to see fairly
about him, to fold in the fore part of the brim within the crown, which
gave it the appearance of half a hat, and in this way was he equipped
when he joined Jane and little George. They had been intimately
acquainted from the first; he had done many little kind offices for her,
and had the sagacity to discover that there was something about her
greatly superior to the other girls about the hamlet; and he had never
used the same freedom with her in his frolics that he was wont to do
with them.

"What ails you, Jeany?" said he; "I thought I heard you greeting."

"No, no, Barnaby; I do not ail any thing; I was not crying."

"Why, woman, you're _crying_ yet, as you call it; tell me what ails you,
and whar ye're gaun this wild gate?"

"I'm going to leave you, Barnaby. I am going far from this."

"I fear ye're gaun awa frae us a'thegether. Hae ye been obliged to leave
your ain wee house for want o' meat?"

"I had plenty of meat; but your master has turned me out of my cot at an
hour's warning; he would not even suffer me to remain overnight, and I
know of no place to which I can go."

"O, deil be i' the auld hard-heartit loon! Heard ever ony body the like
o' that?--What ailed him at ye? Hae ye done ony thing, Jeany, or said
ony thing wrang?"

"It is that which distresses me. I have not been given to know my
offence, and I can form no conjecture of it."

"If I had a hame, Jeany, ye should hae a share o't. I dinna ken o' ane I
wad make mair welcome, even though I should seek a bed for mysel. War ye
at my father's cottage, I could insure you a month's good hamely
lodging, but it is far away, an' a wild road till't. I hae indeed an
auld aunt about twa miles frae this, but she's no muckle to lippen to,
unless it come frae her ain side o' the house; an' then she's a' hinny
and joe. If ye like I'll gang that length wi' ye, an' try if she'll put
ye up a while till we see how matters turn."

Jane was now so much confused in her mind, that, not being able to form
any better measure for the present, she arose and followed her ragged
conductor, and they arrived at his aunt's house before sun-set.

"My dear aunt," said Barnaby, "here is a very good an' a very helpless
lassie turned away frae her hame this same day, and has nae place to
gang to; if ye'll be sae good, an' sae kind, as to let her stay a while
wi' you, I will do ten times as muckle for you again some ither day."

"My faith, stirra!" said she, setting up a face like a fire-brand, and
putting her arms a-kimbo--"My faith, man, but ye're soon begun to a braw
trade!--How can ye hae the assurance, ye brazen-faced rascal, to come
rinning to me wi' a hizzy an' bairn at your tail, an' desire me to keep
them for ye? I'll sooner see you an' her, an' that little limb, a' hung
up by the links o' the neck, than ony o' ye sal crook a hough or break
bread wi' me."

"There's for't now! There's for't! When the deil gets in, the fire maun
flee out!--But aunt, I ken the first word's aye the warst wi' ye; ye're
never sae ill as ye say. Think like a Christian. How wad ye hae likit,
when ye war as young, to hae been turned out to the open hills wi' a
bairn in your arms?"

"Hear to the tatterdemallion!--Christian! Bairn i' _my_ arms!--Ye
impudent, hempy-looking tike that ye are! Pack out o' my house, I say,
or I'll gar the bluid blind your een--ay, an' your bit toastit pie too,
wi' its piece barrell'd beef! Gang after your braw gallaunt, wi' your
oxterfu' ket!--A bonny pair, troth!--A light head makes a heavy fitt!"

Barnaby retired with his back foremost, facing up his aunt all the way
till fairly in the open fields, for fear of actual violence; but the
epithets he bestowed on her there in the bitterness of his heart cannot
here be set down. Jane trembled, yet was obliged to smile at his
extravagance, for it had no bounds; while his aunt stood in her door,
exulting and calling after him every thing that she could construe to
mortify and provoke him. Tears for a space choked his utterance; at
length he forced out the following sentence in vollies.

"Wae--wae be to the--the auld randy--witch!--Had I but the--owrance o'
the land for ae day--I--I should gar some look about them. My master
an' she hae this wark to answer for yet; they'll get their dichens for't
some day--that's ae comfort! Come away, Jeany--they'll squeel for
this--let them tak it!--Come away, Jeany."

"Where would you have me to go now, Barnaby?"

"Out-by aff that auld witch at ony rate! I'll hae ye put up though I
should travel a hunder mile."

"Let me beseech you to return to your flock, and trouble yourself no
farther about my infant and I. Heaven will take care of us."

"It disna look very like it just now. I dinna argy that it is wrang to
trust in Heaven--only, gin we dinna use the means, Heaven's no obliged
to work miracles for us. It is hard upon the gloamin', an' there is not
another house near us; if we sit down and trust, ye'll hae to sleep in
the fields, an' then baith you an' that dear bairn may get what ye will
never cast. Let us make a wee exertion the night, and I hae resolved
what ye shall do to-morrow."

"And what shall I do to-morrow, Barnaby?"

"Go with me to my parents; they hae nae doughter o' their ain, an' my
mither will be muckle the better o' your help, an' they will baith be
very glad to see you, Jeany. Gudeness be thankit! the warld's no just a'
alike. I' the meantime my pickle gimmers dinna need muckle at my hand
just now, sae I'll gae an' ax my master for a day to see my fock, and
gang fit for fit wi' ye the morn."

She fixed her humid eyes on him in pleasing astonishment; she had never
before witnessed such earnest and disinterested benevolence; the
proposal was made in such a way that she could not refuse it, else she
saw that she would give a kind and feeling heart pain. "I have a great
mind to make trial of your expedient, good Barnaby," said she; "all
parts of the country are now alike to me; I must go somewhere; and as
it is but a hard day's journey, I will go and see the parents of so good
a lad."

"Now that's spoken like yoursel, an' I'm glad to hear ye say't--But
what's to come o' ye the night?"

"I have some victuals with me, and I can lie in the fields this pleasant
night; it is a good one to begin with, for who knows what's before one?"

"I canna think o' that ava. If ye war to lay that bonny red cheek on the
cauld dew, an' the wind blawin' i' little George's face, there wad some
sleep nane the night; but there is a little snug sheep-house in our
Hope, a wee bit frae this; let us gang there, an' I will take little
George in my bosom, an' hap _you_ wi' my plaid.--O, but I forgot--that
will never do," continued he, in a melancholy tone, and looking at his
ragged doublet and riven clothes. Away, however, to the sheep-cot they
went, where they found plenty of old hay, and Jane instantly proposed
that he should go home and leave them alone, get leave of his master,
and join them next morning.

"But I dinna ken about it," said Barnaby, hanging his head and looking
serious; "that linn's an unco uncanny place for bogles; an' by this time
o' night they'll be keeking ower the black haggs o' the Cairny Moss to
see what's gaun on. If ony o' them war to come on ye here, they might
terrify you out o' your wits, or carry ye baith aff, lith and limb--Is
the callant baptized?"

Jane answered in the affirmative, smiling; and farther assured him, that
he needed to be under no apprehensions on account of spirits, for she
was perfectly at ease on that score, having a good assurance that no
spirit had power over her.

"Ay, ye are maybe a gospel minister's bairn, or an auld Cameronian; that
is, I mean come o' the saints and martyrs--they had unco power--I hae
heard o' some o' them that fought the deil, hand to fist, for an hour
and forty minutes, and dang him at the last--yethered him and yerked him
till he couldna mou' another curse. But these times are gane! yet it's
no sae lang sin' auld Macmillan (ye hae heard o' auld Macmillan?) was
coming through that linn i' the derk wi' twa o' his elders an' they spak
o' the bogle, but Macmillan jeered at it; an' when they came to the tap
o' yon steep brae they stoppit to take their breath; and there they
heard a loud nichering voice come out o' the howe o' the linn, an' it
cried,

    "Ha, ha, Macky! had ye been your lane,
    Ye should never hae crackit through either wood or water again."

"Say ye sae, fause loun," quo' the auld hardy veteran; "than be at your
speed, for I'll gang through that wood my lane in spite o' your teeth,
an' a' hell at your back." An' what does the carl do, but leaves his twa
elders yonder, standin glowrin i' the howe night, an' trodges his way
back through the linn to the very farrest side o't--said the
hunder-an'-ninth psalm against him, an' came back wi' never a turned
hair on his head. But yet for a' that, Jeany, dinna lippen ower muckle
to bygane things; there have been fairy raids i' the Hope, an' mony ane
ill fleyed. I could tell ye sic a story of a wicked laird here!"

Jane entreated him not to tell it that night, but amuse them with it
to-morrow as they journeyed. He was passive--left them his plaid--went
home and got leave of absence from his master for two days, but hinted
nothing of what had passed in the Hope. He was again back at the
sheep-house by the time the sun arose; and, early as it was, he found
Jane walking without, while little George was sleeping soundly on the
hay, wrapped in the plaid. She said she had got a sound and short sleep,
but awakening at dawn she had stepped out to taste the fresh mountain
air, and see the sun rise. When they lifted the child he was somewhat
fretful--a thing not customary with him; but he was soon pacified, and
they proceeded without delay on their journey.

Until once they had cleared the boundaries of the farm of Todburn,
Barnaby was silent, and looked always around with a jealous eye, as if
dreading a surprise. When his fellow-traveller asked the reasons of his
anxiety, he remained silent; but as soon as they got fairly into the
next glen he became as gay and talkative as ever. She deemed it to be
some superstitious dread that discomposed him, but was left to guess the
cause.

"Jeany," said he, "you said you had a short and sound sleep last
night--so had I. Pray, did you dream ony?"

"Not that I remember of; but I put no faith in dreams."

"Weel, how different fock's bodies, or their souls, or something about
them maun be frae ane anither! For I'm come this length in the warld,
an' I never yet dreamed a regular dream, in a sound sleep, that I didna
get as plainly read to me as the A B C. I had a strange dream last
night, Jeany, an' it was about you. I am sure I'll live to see it
fulfilled; but what it means even now, I canna in the least comprehend."

"Well, Barnaby, suppose you give us it. I have read the Book of
Knowledge, and may lend you a hand at the interpretation."

"I thought I saw ye lying in a lonesome place, an' no ane in the wide
world to help or heed ye, till there was a poor bit black mootit-like
corby came down frae the hills an' fed ye. I saw it feeding ye, an' I
thought ye war as contentit, an' as bonny, an' as happy as ever. But ere
ever I wist, down comes there a great majestic eagle some gate frae
about the e'e-bree o' the heavens, an' cleeks ye away up to the lowne
bieldy side o' a sunny hill, where ye had a' braw things. An' I dinna
ken how it was, I thought ye war a she eagle sitting amang your young,
an' I thought aye ye war a woman too, an' I coudna separate the tane
frae the tither; but the poor bit plottit forefoughen corby gaed alang
w'ye, an' ye war kind to him, an' fed him in your turn, an' I saw him
hoppin, an' pickin, an' dabbin round about ye, as happy as ever I saw a
beast, an' the erne didna chase him away, but was kind to him; but
somehow, or I wakened, I thought it was the confusedest thing I ever
saw. Na, ye needna laugh nor smile, for we'll baith live to see it
read."

"Believe me, Barnaby, it will never be apparent; you may force
circumstances to agree with it, but these will not be obvious ones."

"It's needless for me to arguy wi' you unless I can bring things hame to
your ain conscience; but can ye say that ye never got a dream read?"

"Never that I noted; for I never thought of them."

"Or, for instance, have ye never, when you saw a thing for the first
time, had a distinct recollection of having seen it sometime afore?"

"Never."

"How wonderfu'! I have done so a thousand an' a thousand times. I have
remembered of having seen exactly the same scene, the same faces, the
same looks, and heard the same words, though I knew all the while that I
never had seen them in reality; and that I could only have seen them in
some former vision, forgotten, or perhaps never remembered."

She now saw clearly that dreams, visions, and apparitions, were
Barnaby's region of existence--His very thoughts and language seemed
elevated whenever he entered on the subject; and it being a trait in the
shepherd's character that she had never thought of before, she resolved
to encourage it, and asked for a single instance of that strange
foresight alluded to.

"You'll surely acknowledge," said Barnaby, "that it is impossible I
could ever have come up that strait swire before with a bairn on my
back, an' a young woman gaun beside me exactly like you; an' that while
in that condition, I should have met wi' a bull an' a cow coming out the
path by themsels, an' thought o' yon craig for a shelter to the bairn
that I was carrying; yet when that happened about an hour ago, I
remembered so distinctly of having gone through it some time long
before, that I knew every step that would next be taken, and every
word that would next be said. It made me very thoughtful; but I can
remember nothing of where or when I dreamed it, or what was the issue.

"There was another instance that I'll never forget. The winter afore
last, I gaed out wi' my father in the morning to help him to gather the
sheep; for the rime had sitten down, an' the clouds war creepin, and we
kend the drift wad be on. Weel, away we sets, but a' the hills were
wrappit i' the clouds o' rime as they had been rowed in a fleece o'
frosty woo, an' we couldna see a stime; we were little better than fock
gaun _graeping_ for sheep; an' about twal o'clock, (I mind it weel,)
just when I was in the very straitest and steepest part o' the
Shielbrae-Hope, the wind gae a swirl, an' I lookit up an' saw the cloud
screwing up to heaven--the brow o' the hill cleared, an' I saw like a
man cringing and hanging ower the point o' the rock, an' there was seven
white ewes an' a black ane gaun bleetin in a raw yont aneath him. That
was a'; but the sight strak me motionless. I mindit that I had seen the
very thing afore; the very clouds--the very rocks--an' the man standing
courin' and keekin' ower, wi' the white rime hingin' about his lugs like
feathers; an' I mindit that it endit ill--it endit awsomely!--for I
thought it endit in death. I could speak nae mair a' that day; for I
expectit that either my father or I wad never gang hame living. He aften
said to me, 'What ails ye, callant? Are ye weel eneugh? Od, ye're gane
stupid.' We saved some sheep, an' lost some, like mony ane, for it was
a dreadfu' afternoon; however, we wan baith safe hame. But that night,
afore we gaed to bed, our neighbour, auld Robin Armstrang, was brought
into our house a corp. Our fock had amaist gane out o' their judgment;
but the very features, the white rime frozen about the cauld stiff een,
an' the iceshogles hangin' at the grey hair, war nae new sight to me: I
had seen them a' before, I kendna when. Ah, Jeany! never tell me that we
haena some communication wi' intelligences, far ayont our capacity to
comprehend."

The seriousness of Barnaby's manner made it evident to his fellow
traveller that he believed in the reality of every word he had said;
there was an inconceivable sublimity in the whole idea, and she fancied
herself going to reside, perhaps for a season, in the regions of
imagination and romance, and she asked him if his father and mother had
faith in dreams an' apparitions?

"Aye, that they hae," answered he; "ye had need to tak care how ye
dispute the existence of fairies, brownies, and apparitions there; ye
may as weel dispute the gospel o' Sant Mathew. We dinna believe in a'
the gomral fantastic bogles an' spirits that fley light-headed fock up
an' down the country, but we believe in a' the apparitions that warn o'
death, that save life, an' that discover guilt. I'll tell you what we
believe, ye see.

"The deil an' his adgents, they fash nane but the gude fock; the
Cameronians, an' the prayin' ministers, an' sic like. Then the bogles,
they are a better kind o' spirits, they meddle wi' nane but the guilty;
the murderer, an' the mansworn, an' the cheater o' the widow an'
fatherless, they do for _them_. Then the fairies, they're very harmless;
they're keener o' fun an' frolic than aught else; but if fock neglect
kirk ordinances, they see after _them_. Then the brownie, he's a kind
o' half-spirit half-man; he'll drudge an' do a' the wark about the town
for his meat, but then he'll no work but when he likes for a' the king's
dominions. That's precisely what we a' believe here awa', auld an'
young; an' I'll tell ye twa or three stories that we a' ken to be true,
an' which I wadna misbelieve for a' that I'm worth.

"Sandy Shiel, the herd o' the Birky-Cleuch, was standing afore his sheep
ae fine day in winter. The snaw had been drifted ower the brae-head to
the size of another hill, but it was blawn bare aneath; an' there was
Sandy standin' i' the sun afore his sheep, whistling an' singing, and
knitting his stocking. Ere ever he wist there comes a broken-leggit hare
by his very foot--Every Scotsman's keen of a hunt--Sandy flings the
plaid frae him, an' after the hare what he can streik, hallooing, and
crying on his dog to kep. As he gaed o'er the brow he was close upon
her, an' had up his stick just to knock her dead--Tut! the hare
vanished in a moment! Sandy jumpit round-about an' round about--'What
the devil's come o' my hare now? Is she santit? or yirdit? or flown
awa'?'--Sandy lookit up into the air, but she wasna to be seen there
neither. She was gane, an' for ever! Sandy was amaist swarf'd, the cauld
sweat brak on him, an' he clew his head. 'Now, gude faith, I hae seen
muckle,' quo' Sandy, 'but the like o' that I saw never.' Sandy trodged
back, wantin' his hare, to lift his plaid. But what think ye? The hale
volume o' snaw on the hill aboon had shot away and burried it fifty feet
deep; it was nae mair seen till the month o' May. Sandy kneeled down
among the snaw and thankit his Maker; he saw brawly what the hare had
been.

"I'll tell you another that I like still better. The shepherd's house at
Glen-Tress, in Tweeddale, had ance been a farm-steading, but it was at
the time this happened inhabited by an honest respectable shepherd, his
wife, and six children. One evening after the sun had set, the eldest
girl came running in, crying, 'Bless me, sirs, come here--Here is the
grandest lady coming to the house that ever was seen in the world.' They
all ran to the door, young and old, and they every one saw her coming at
the distance of only about twenty paces--She was never more seen! But
that very moment the house fell in, gable and all, with a dreadful
crash; and thus a worthy family was saved from momentary destruction.
Ah! I wadna hae given that man's feelings of gratitude that night toward
his Maker and Preserver, for a' the dogmas of a thousand cauld-heartit
philosophers!"

"Nor would I," said Jane; and they walked on in deep silence.

Barnaby always carried the child one-half of the way as nearly as they
could agree, but after carrying him often two miles, he would contend
that it was but one; they got plenty of bread and milk at the
farm-houses and cottages as they passed, for there was no house of
accommodation near the whole of their track. One time, after they had
refreshed and rested themselves, Jane reminded her conductor that he had
promised the evening before to entertain her on their journey with the
story of the profligate laird.

"That's an awfu' story," said Barnaby, "but it is soon tauld. It was the
Laird o' Errickhaw; he that biggit his house amang the widow's corn, and
never had a day to do weel in it. It isna yet a full age sin' the
foundation-stane was laid, an' for a' the grandeur that was about it,
there's nae man at this day can tell where the foundation has been, if
he didna ken afore. He was married to a very proud precise lady, come o'
high kin, but they greed aye weel eneugh till bonny Molly Grieve came to
the house to serve. Molly was as light-hearted as a kid, an' as blithe
as a laverock, but she soon altered. She first grew serious, then sad,
and unco pale at times; an' they whiles came on her greetin by hersel.
It was ower weel seen how matters stood, an' there was nae mair peace
about the house. At length it was spread ower a' the parish that the
lady had gotten Molly a fine genteel service in Edinburgh, an' up comes
hurkle-backit Charley Johnston, the laird's auld companion in
wickedness, wi' a saddle an' a pad to take her away. When they set her
on ahint him, Molly shook hands wi' a' the servants, but couldna speak,
for she little kend when she would see them again. But, instead o'
taking her away i' the fair day-light, i' the ee o' God an' man, he took
her away just when the lave war gaun to their beds: an' instead o'
gaeing the road to Edinburgh, they war seen riding ower the Cacra-cross
at twal o'clock at night. Bonny Molly Grieve was never seen again, nor
heard of mair in this world! But there war some banes found about the
Alemoor Loch that the doctors said had belanged to a woman. There was
some yellow hair, too, on the scull, that was unco like Molly's, but
nae body could say.

"Then there was a fine strapping lass came in her place, a farmer's
daughter, that had mony a lad running after her, but it wasna a year and
a half till a service was to provide in Edinburgh for her too. Up came
hurkle-backit Charley to take her away, but no gin they should a' hae
sutten down on their knees wad she gae wi' him; she grat an' pray'd, an'
they fleeched an' flait; but she stayed in the parish in spite o' their
teeth, and shamed them a'. She had a son, but Charley got him to take to
the nursing, far away some gate, an' there was nae body ony mair fashed
wi' him.

"It wad be endless to tell ye ower a' their wickedness, for it can
hardly be believed. Charley had mony sic job to do, baith at hame and at
a distance. They grew baith odious in the country, for they turned aye
the langer the waur, and took less pains to hide it; till ae night that
the laird was walking at the back o' his garden, in the moon-light. It
was thought he was waiting for a woman he had some tryste with, but that
was conjecture, for he never said sae. At length he saw ane coming
towards him, and hasted to meet her, but just as he approached, she held
up her hand at him, as it war to check him, or make him note who she
was; and when he lookit in her face, and saw what it was like, he
uttered a loud cry, and fell senseless on the ground. Some fock heard
the noise, and ran to the place, and fand him lying streekit in a deep
dry seuch at the back of the garden. They carried him in, and he soon
came to himself; but after that he was never like the same man, but
rather like ane dementit. He durst never mair sleep by himsel while he
lived; but that wasna lang, for he took to drinking, and drank, and
swore, and blasphemed, and said dreadfu' things that folk didna
understand. At length, he drank sae muckle ae night out o' desperation,
that the blue lowe came burning out at his mouth, and he died on his
ain hearth-stane, at a time o' life when he should scarcely have been at
his prime.

"But it wasna sae wi' Charley! He wore out a lang and hardened life;
and, at the last, when death came, he coudna die. For a day and two
nights they watched him, thinking every moment would be the last, but
always a few minutes after the breath had left his lips, the feeble
cries of infants arose from behind the bed, and wakened him up again.
The family were horrified; but his sons and daughters were men and
women, and for their ain sakes they durstna let ane come to hear his
confessions. At last, on the third day at two in the morning, he died
clean away. They watched an hour in great dread, and then streekit him,
and put the dead-claes on him, but they hadna weel done before there
were cries, as if a woman had been drowning, came from behind the bed,
and the voice cried, "O, Charley, spare my life!--Spare my life! For
your own soul's sake and mine, spare my life!" On which the corpse again
sat up in the bed, pawled wi' its hands, and stared round wi' its dead
face. The family could stand it nae langer, but fled the house, and rade
and ran for ministers, but before any of them got there, Charley was
gane. They sought a' the house, and in behind the bed, and could find
naething; but that same day he was found about a mile frae his ain
house, up in the howe o' the Baileylee-linn, a' torn limb frae limb, an'
the dead-claes beside him. There war twa corbies seen flying o'er the
muir that day, carrying something atween them, an' fock suspectit it was
Charley's soul, for it was heard makin' a loud maen as they flew o'er
Alemoor. At the same time it was reportit, that there was to be seen
every morning at two a clock, a naked woman torfelling on the Alemoor
loch, wi' her hands tied behind her back, and a heavy stane at her neck.
It's an awsome story. I never dare tell it but in the middle o' the day,
and even then it gars a' my flesh creep; but the hale country has heard
it, and God only kens whether it be true or no. It has been a warning to
mony ane."

Our fair wanderer asked for no more ghost stories. The last had sufficed
her,--it having been even more shocking than the former ones were
delightful; so they travelled on, conversing about common or casual
events, save that she gave him a short sketch of her history, whereof to
inform his parents, with strong injunctions of secrecy. They came in
view of his father's cottage before sunset. It was situated in the very
wildest and most romantic glen in the shire of Peebles, at the
confluence of two rough but clear mountain streams, that ran one on each
side of the house and _kail-yard_, and mingled their waters immediately
below these. The valley was level, green, and beautiful, but the hills
on each side high, steep, and romantic; and while they cast their long
black shadows aslant the glen, the beams of the sun were shed over these
like streamers in the middle air. It was a scene of tranquillity and
repose, if not indeed the abode of the genii and fairies. Jane's heart
danced within her when her eye turned to the varied scenery of the
mountains, but again sunk when it fell on the cottage at which she was
going to seek a retreat. She dreaded her reception, knowing how
equivocal her appearance there must be; but she longed and thirsted for
such a retreat, and as she was not destitute of money, she determined to
proffer more for her board than she could well afford to pay, rather
than be refused. Barnaby also spoke less as they advanced up the glen,
and seemed struggling with a kind of dryness about his tongue, which
would not suffer him to pronounce the words aright. Two fine shaggy
healthy-looking collies came barking down the glen to meet them, and at
a timid distance behind them, a half-grown puppy, making more noise than
them both. He was at one time coming brattling forward, and barking
fiercely, as if going to attack them, and at another, running yelping
away from them with his tail between his legs. Little George laughed as
he had been tickled at him. When the dogs came near, and saw that it was
their old fire-side acquaintance and friend, they coured at his feet,
and whimpered for joy; they even licked his fair companion's hand, and
capered around her, as if glad to see any friend of Barnaby's. The
whelp, perceiving that matters were amicably made up, likewise ventured
near; and though he had never seen any of them before, claimed
acquaintance with all, and was so kind and officious that he wist not
what to do; but at last he fell on the expedient of bearing up the
corner of Jane's mantle in his mouth, which he did all the way to the
house.--George was perfectly delighted.

"I think," said Jane, "the kindness of these creatures betokens a hearty
welcome within!"

"Ay, that it does," answered Barnaby; "a dog that is brought up with a
man in a wild place, is always of the very same disposition with
himself."

Strangers seldom approached that sequestered spot--passengers never.
They observed, while yet at a good distance, Barnaby's mother standing
amid her burly boys at the end of the cottage, watching their approach,
and they heard her calling distinctly to her husband, "Aigh! Geordie,
yon's our ain Barny, I ken by auld Help's motions; but wha she is that
he's bringing wi' him, is ayont my comprehension."

She hurried away in to put her fire-side in some order, and nought was
then to be seen but two or three bare-headed boys, with their hair the
colour of peat-ashes, setting their heads always now and then by the
corner of the house, and vanishing again in a twinkling. The old
shepherd was sitting on his divot-seat, without the door, mending a
shoe. Barnaby strode up to him. "How are ye the night, father?"

"No that ill, Barny lad--is that you? How are ye yoursel?" said a
decent-looking middle-aged man, scratching his head at the same time
with the awl, and fixing his eyes, not on his son, but the companion
that he had brought with him. When he saw her so young, so beautiful,
and the child in her arms, the enquiring look that he cast on his son
was unutterable. Silence reigned for the space of a minute. Barnaby
made holes in the ground with his staff--the old shepherd began again to
sew his shoe, and little George prattled to his mamma, "It's a vely good
bonny halp, mamma; Geoge nevel saw sic a good halp."

"An' how hae ye been sin' we saw ye, Barny?"

"Gaylys!"

"I think ye hae brought twa young strangers wi' ye?"

"I wat have I."

"Whar fell ye in wi' them?"

"I want to speak a word to you, father."

The old shepherd flung down his work, and followed his son round the
corner of the house. It was not two minutes till he came back. Jane had
sat down on the sod-seat.

"This is a pleasant evening," said he, addressing her.

"It is a very sweet evening," was the reply.

"Ye'll be weary; ye had better _gang in_ an' rest ye."

She thanked him, and was preparing to go.

"It's a muckle matter," continued he, "whan fock can depend on their
ain. My Barny never deceived me a' his life, an' you are as welcome here
as heart can mak ye. The flower in May is nae welcomer than ye are to
this bit shieling, and your share of a' that's in it. Come your ways in,
my bonny woman, an' think nae shame. Ye shall never be lookit on as
either a beggar or borrower here, but just ane o' oursels." So saying he
took her hand in both his, and led her into the house.

"Wife, here's a young stranger our son has brought to bide a while wi'
ye; mak her welcome i' the mean time, an' ye'll be better acquaintit by
and by."

"In troth I sal e'en do sae. Come awa in by to the muckle chair--Whar is
he himsel, the muckle duddy feltered gouk?"

"Ah, he's coming, poor fellow--he's takin a _pipe_ to himsel at the
house-end--there's a shower i' the heads wi' Barny--his heart can stand
naething--it is as saft as a snaw-ba', an' far mair easily thawed, but
it is aye in the right place for a' that."

It was a happy evening; the conversation was interesting, and kept up
till a late hour; and when the old couple learned from Jane of the
benevolent disinterested part that their son had acted, their eyes
glowed with delight, and their hearts waxed kinder and kinder. Before
they retired to rest, the old shepherd performed family worship, with a
glow of devotional warmth which Jane had never before witnessed in man.
The psalm that he sung, the portion of Scripture that he read, and the
prayer that he addressed to the throne of Grace, savoured all of charity
and benevolence to our fellow-creatures. The whole economy of the family
was of that simple and primitive cast, that the dwellers in a large city
never dream of as existing. There was to be seen contentment without
affluence or ambition, benevolence without ostentation, and piety
without hypocrisy; but at the same time such a mixture of gaiety, good
sense, and superstitious ideas, blent together in the same minds, as was
altogether inscrutable. It was a new state of existence to our fair
stranger, and she resolved with avidity to improve it to the best
advantage.

But we must now leave her in her new habitation, and return with Barnaby
to the families of Earlhall and Todburn. Lindsey went up the water every
day fishing, as he had done formerly, but was astonished at observing,
from day to day, that his fair Wool-gatherer's cottage was locked, and
no smoke issuing from it. At first he imagined that she might have gone
on a visit, but at length began to suspect that some alteration had
taken place in her circumstances; and the anxiety that he felt to have
some intelligence, whether that change was favourable or the reverse,
was such that he himself wondered at it. He could not account for it
even to his own mind. It was certainly _the child_ that so much
interested him, else he _could not_ account for it. Lindsey might
easily have solved the difficulty had he acquiesced freely in the
sentiments of his own heart, and acknowledged to himself that he was in
love. But no!--all his reasoning, as he threw the line across the stream
and brought it back again, went to disprove that. "That I can be in love
with the girl is out of the question--there is no danger of such an
event; for, in the first place, I would not wrong her, or abuse her
affections, for the whole world; and in the next, I have a certain rank
and estimation to uphold in society. I am a proprietor to a large
extent--a freeholder of the county--come of a good family, at least by
the father's side, and that I should fall in love with and marry a poor
vagrant Wool-gatherer, with a"----! He was going to pronounce a word,
but it stuck, not in his throat, but in the very utmost perceptible
avenues that lead to the heart. "It is a very fine child, however,--I
wish I had him under my protection, then his mother might come and see
him; but I care not for that, provided I had the child. I'll have the
child, and for that purpose I will enquire after the mother directly."

He went boldly up to the cot, and peeped in at the little window. The
hearth was cold, and the furniture neatly arranged. He examined the
door, but the step and threshold had not been swept as they wont for
many days, and the green grass was beginning to peep up around them.
"There is something extremely melancholy in this!" said he to himself.
"I could not endure the veriest wretch on my estate to be thus lost,
without at least enquiring after him."

He turned his eyes to the other cottages, and to the farm-house, but
lacked the courage to go boldly up to any of them, and ask after the
object of his thoughts. He returned to the fishing, but caught no fish,
or if he did it was against his will.

On Barnaby's return he made some sly enquiries about the causes that
induced to Jane's removal without effect, the farmer had kept all so
snug. But haverel Meg, (as they called her for a nick-name,) his sister,
knew, and though she was an excellent keeper of secrets among her own
sex, yet she could not help blabbing them sometimes to the young
fellows, which her brother always accounted a very ridiculous
propensity;--whether or not it is a natural one among old maids, the
relater of this tale does not pretend to decide; he is induced to think
it is, but is not dogmatic on that side, not having bestowed due
consideration on the subject.

One day, when Barnaby came home to his breakfast rather later than
usual, and while he was sitting hewing away at a good stiff bicker of
paritch, mixed with butter-milk, his excellent dog Nimrod all the time
sitting with his head leaned on his master's knee, watching the progress
of every spoonful, thinking the latter was rather going near him that
day in their wonted proportions--while Barnaby, I say, was thus
delightfully and busily employed, in comes Meg, bare-footed, with a
clean white wrapper and round-eared cap on. "Barny, will ye hae time to
help me to the water wi' a boucking o' claes? Ye'll just only hae to
carry the tae end o' the hand-barrow to the water, wait till I sinde up
the sarks, an' help me hame wi' them again."

"That I will, Miss Peggy, wi' heart an' hand."

"Miss Peggy! Snuffs o' tobacco! Meg's good enough! Troth, I'm nane o'
your molloping, precise flegaries, that want to be _miss'd_ an'
_beckit_, an' _bowed_ to--Na, sooth! Meg's good enough--plain downright
_Meg o' the Todburn_."

"Weel, weel; haud your tongue, I'll do a' that ye bid me, an' mair, Meg,
my bonny woman."

"How war a' your focks, Barny, when ye war ower seeing them?"

"Unco weel, an' they're muckle behadden to you for your kind speering."

"I kend your father weel; he's a good cannie man."

"I wish he had beltit your shoulders as aft as he has done mine, ye
maybe wadna hae said sae muckle for him."

"Ay, it's weel o' you to say sae; but he's a douse, respectable man, and
he's no disgraced in his son."

Barnaby rose with his bicker in his hand; gave it a graceful swing, as a
gentleman does his hat when he meets a lady, made a low bow, and set
down Nimrod his share of the paritch.

When they went to the river Barnaby sat him down on the bank, and Meg
went into the running stream, and began with great agility, and much
splashing, to wash up her clothes. Barnaby perceived her smiling to
herself, and was sure that a volley of some stuff or other was
forthcoming. She cast her eyes towards the laird's house, then looked up
the water, then down, in case any one might be angling on it; and after
perceiving that there was nobody within a mile of them, she spoke as
follows to Barnaby, in a half whisper, lest any one should overhear her.

"Gude sauf us to the day, Barny man! What think ye o' our laird?"

"Very muckle. I think him a decent worthy lad."

"Decent! Shame fa' _his_ decency!--I watna what will be countit
_un_decent soon! Sae ye haena heard o' his shamfu' connection wi' the
bit prodigal, dinnagood lassie, that was here?"

"Never."

"It's a' ower true though; but say nae a word about it. My billy Rob was
obliged to chase her out o' the country for it; an' a burnin shame an' a
disgrace it was to the laird to take up wi' the likes o' her.--Deil a
bit o' her has the pith o' a pipe-stapple!--Fich, fy! Away wi' your
spindle-shankit babyclouts--they're no the gear."

"As ye say, Meg. I like nane o' the women that _stand pon trifles_."

"Stand on trifles!--Ha! ha! that's real good! that's devilish clever for
a--young man! Ha! ha!--Tut! that water's weetin' a' my claes.--Wad ye
hae made sic a choice, Barny?"

"D'ye think that I'm blind? or that I dinna ken what's what?--Na, na,
Meg! let me alane; I'm no sae young a cat but I ken a mouse by a
feather."

"If a' our young men had the sense o' you, Barny, some o' them might get
a pock an' a wheen rustit nails to jingle in't; they might get something
better than a bit painted doll, wi' a waist like a thread-paper, an' hae
nought ado foreby but to draw in the chair an' sit down; but _they'll_
rin after a wheen clay-cakes baken i' the sun, an' leave the good
substantial ait-meal bannocks to stand till they moul, or be pouched by
them that draff an' bran wad better hae mensed!--Tut! I'm ower deep into
the stream again, without ever thinkin' o't."

"That's a' ower true that ye hae been sayin', Meg--ower true, indeed!
But as to your news about the laird and Jane, I dinna believe a word
o't."

"Oh! it's maybe no true, ye ken! It's very likely a lee! There's
naething mair likely, than that a' their correspondence was as pure as
the morning snaw. For a laird, ye ken, worth three thousand pund o'
yearly rental, to frequent the house o' a bit lassie for an hour ilka
day, an' maybe ilka night to, wha kens; ye ken it's a' fair! there's
nought mair likely than that they're _very_ innocent! An' _sic_ a ane
too as she is! little better, I trow, than she should be, gin a' war
kend. To be sure she has a son, _that_ may arguy _something_ for her
decency. But after a', I dinna blame _her_, for I ken by mysel----"

"Haud your tongue now, Meg, my bonny quean; for I ken ye are gaun to lee
on yoursel, an' speak nonsense into the bargain."

"Ah! Barny! but ye are a queer ane!" (then in a whisper.) "I
say--Barny--What do ye think o' the bit farm o' Hesperslack? How wad ye
like to be tenant there yoursel, an' hae servants o' your ain?"

"I haena thought about that yet; but yonder's my master keekin ower the
knowe; he'll be thinkin I'm stayin unco lang frae my sheep."

"Ah! is my billy Rob yonder?--No a _word_ ye ken now, Barny. No a cheip
aboon your breath about yon."

Sad and heavy were Barnaby's reflections that day as he herded his sheep
all alone. "And _this_ is the girl that I have taken and recommended so
warmly to my parents! I do not believe the hateful slander; but I will
go and inform them of all. It is proper they should know all that I
know, and then let them judge for themselves. Poor luckless Jeany! I
fear she is a ruined creature, be she as innocent and harmless as she
will!"

Barnaby was resolved to go, but day past on after day, and still he had
not the heart to go and tell his parents, although every whisper that
he heard tended rather to strengthen suspicion than dispel it.

On the very day that we left Lindsey in such distress for the loss of
his amiable Wool-gatherer, Barnaby and he met by the side of the stream,
at the foot of the Todburn-Hope. They were both alike anxious to speak
to one another, but neither of them had the courage to begin, although
both were burning to talk on the same theme. Lindsey fished away,
swimming the fly across the ripple as dexterously and provokingly as he
was able. Barnaby stood and looked on in silence; at length a yellowfin
rose. "Aigh, that was a great chap! I wish your honour had hookit that
ane."

"It was better for him that I did not. Do you ever fish any?"

"O yes. I gump them whiles."

"_Gump_ them? pray what mode of fishing is that?"

"I guddle them in aneath the stanes an' the braes like."

"I do not exactly understand the terms nor the process. Pray will you
be so good," continued he, holding out the fishing-rod to Barnaby, "as
give me a specimen how you _gump_ the fish?"

"Od bless you, sir, I can do naething wi' that goad; but if ye'll gang
wi' me a wee piece up the Todburn-Hope, or up to the Rowntree-Linn, I'll
let ye see gumping to perfection."

On being assured that it was not above half a mile to either of the
places, the laird accompanied Barnaby without hesitation, to witness
this pastoral way of fishing. By the way their converse became very
interesting to both parties, but we cannot interrupt the description of
such a favourite rural sport just now. Let it suffice that their
discourse was all concerning a fair unfortunate, of whom the reader has
heard a good deal already, and of whom he shall hear more in due time.

They crossed over a sloping ground, at the bottom of a green steep hill,
and soon came into the Todburn-Hope. It was a narrow level valley
between two high hills, and terminated in the haunted linn, above the
sheep-house formerly mentioned. Down this narrow vale the Tod Burn ran
with a thousand beautiful serpentine windings, and at every one of these
turns there were one or two clear deep pools, overhung by little green
banks. Into the first of these pools Barnaby got with his staff,
plunging and poaching to make all the fish take into close cover; then
he threw off his ragged coat, tucked up the sleeves of his shirt to the
shoulders, tying them together behind, and into the pool he got again,
knees and elbows, putting his arms in below the green banks, into the
closest and most secret recesses of the trouts. There was no eluding
him; he threw them out one after another, sometimes hitting the
astonished laird on the face, or any other part of the body without
ceremony, for his head being down sometimes close with the water, and
sometimes below it, he did not see where he flung them. The trouts being
a little startled at this momentary change from one element to another,
jumped about on the grass, and cast so many acute somersets, that the
laird had greater difficulty in getting hold of them the second time to
put them into his basket, than Barnaby had at first; and when the latter
had changed the scene of plunder to a new pool, Lindsey was commonly to
be seen beside the old one, moving slowly about on his hands and knees.
"I think ye're pinched to catch them on the dry grund, sir," said
Barnaby to him.

"No, no," returned he, with the utmost simplicity; "but I was looking
lest some of them had made their way among the long grass and eluded me;
and besides they are so very active and slippery that I seldom can keep
the hold of them that I get."

As they were going from one of these little pools to another, he said to
our shepherd, "So this is what you call _gumping_?"

"Yes, sir, this is gumping, or _guddling_, ony o' them ye like to
ca't."

"I do not think this is altogether a fair way of fishing."

"Now, I think it is muckle fairer than the tither way, sir. Your way is
founded on the lowest artifice and deceit, but I come as an avowed
enemy, and let them escape me if they can. I come into a family as a
brave mountain robber or free-booter; but you come as a deceitful
friend, promising to treat the family with all good things, that you may
poison them every one unawares. A mountaineer's sports are never founded
on cunning; it's a' sheer and main force wi' us."

Lindsey confessed that the shepherd's arguments had some foundation in
nature and truth, but that they savoured of a period exempt from
civilization and the fine arts. "At all events," said he, "it is
certainly the most downright way of fishing that I ever beheld." In
short, it was not long till the laird was to be seen wading in the
pools, and _gumping_ as busily as the other; and, finally, he was
sometimes so intent on his prey, that the water was running over his
back, so that when he raised himself up it poured in torrents from his
fine Holland shirt and stained cambrick ruffles. "Ye hae settled the
pletts o' your sark," said Barnaby. Never did the family of Earlhall
behold such a basket of trouts; and never had its proprietor such a
day's sport at the fishing, as he had at the _gumping_ or _guddling_ the
trouts among the links of the Todburn-Hope.

Though the sport occupied their minds completely during the time they
were engaged in it, yet it was only a relaxation from concerns of a more
serious nature. From Barnaby's information the laird now saw exactly how
the land lay; and though he got no hint of the part that his mother had
acted in it, yet he rather suspected, for he well knew her sentiments
regarding all the young and beautiful part of her own sex. Barnaby gave
him no notice that he had ever seen the girl after her dismissal, or
that he knew to what part of the world she had retired; and before they
parted he desired him to tell his master to come down and speak with him
that night.

Robin came as appointed; Lindsey and his mother were sitting by
themselves in the parlour when the servant announced him; he was ordered
to join them, and as soon as he came in Lindsey said, "Come away, Robin.
I had a piece of information within these few days of you, that has
somewhat distressed me, and I sent for you to make enquiry concerning
it. What reasons had you for turning away the poor stranger girl and
child from her cot before the term of your agreement expired?"

Robin looked to the window, then to the lady, and then to the window
again, and finally looked down to the carpet, twirled his bonnet with
both hands, and remained silent. Though a strong and speaking look of
appeal was turned on the old lady by Robin from time to time, yet she,
hearing her son speak in that determined manner, likewise sat still
without opening her lips.

"Why don't you answer me?" continued Lindsey. "I ask you simply what
were your reasons for turning her away? you certainly must be able to
state them."

"Hem! We war feared, sir--we war feared that she was a bad ane."

"You were _afraid_ she was bad? Had you no other proofs of her badness
farther than your own fears?"

"Indeed, sir, I never saw ony ill behaviour about the lassie. But ye ken
weel enough that ane wha had forsaken the paths o' virtue and honesty
sae early as it appears she had done, wi' sic an enchanting manner, an'
weelfaurd face into the boot, was rather a dangerous neighbour for sae
mony young chiels."

"I think what Robin says is very true, and good sense," said the old
lady.

"You certainly ought to have taken all these things into consideration
before you bargained with her at first, Robin," said Lindsey. "I
suppose you cannot argue that she is either grown younger or more
beautiful since that period? I rather suspect, Robin, that you have used
this young woman extremely ill; and if you cannot give any better
reasons for your severity towards her, I can find out a method of
forcing you to make an ample retribution."

"Indeed then, sir, sin' I maun tell the truth, I will tell the truth; it
was my lady, your worthy mother there, that persuaded, and _ordered_ me
to turn her away; for we had observed how great a favourite she was with
you, and dreaded the consequences."

"It is then exactly as I suspected. You two have done me a great injury,
and one that will not be easily wiped away. I hope neither of you
intended it; but I would gladly know what trait in my character
justified the conclusion you made? I think you might both have known my
dispositions better than to have so readily believed that I would
injure youth and beauty, that had already been unfortunate in the
world--that I would add to her state of wretchedness, by annihilating
for ever that innate principle of virtue and modesty, inherent in every
young female's breast, which never man loved more, or delighted more to
view, exerting all its primitive and untainted sway. If you had
reflected at all, you could not have believed me capable of it. You have
taken the readiest means in your power of injuring my character in the
eyes of the world. It must naturally be concluded, that there was a
profligate and criminal intercourse subsisting between us, which
rendered such an act of cruelty and injustice necessary. You have hurt
my honour and my feelings, and wronged a defenceless and amiable young
woman. It is on my account that she is thus innocently suffering, and I
am determined, for my own satisfaction, to see her righted, as far as
redress is in my power, though equivalent for an injured reputation
there is none; but every vile insinuation on my account shall be fairly
dispelled. To make, therefore, an end of all reflections at once, I warn
you, Robin, that if she is not found, and restored to her rights, in
less than a fortnight at farthest, you need not be surprised if _you_
are some day removed on as short notice as you gave to her."

The old lady and farmer had an inward view of matters in a different
light: They perceived that the world would say he had brought her back
to keep her there as his mistress, but this elegant and inflated
harangue they were unable to answer. The young man's conscience was
hurt, and they were no casuists. The lady, it is true, uttered some
involuntary sounds as he was speaking, but it was not easy to determine
whether they were groans or hems of approbation. If one might have
judged from her countenance, they were like the former, but the sounds
themselves were certainly modulations of the latter. She was dependant
on her son! Robin was studying a friendly reply, by way of remonstrance,
all the time of the speech; but Robin was a widower, had a good farm, a
large family, and was a tenant at will, and the conclusion of the said
speech was a stumbling-block to Robin.

Pray, gentle reader, did you ever see a country maiden baking pease-meal
bannocks? If you ever did you must have noted, that before she committed
them one by one to the gridiron, she always stood straight up, with her
head gracefully turned to one side, and moulded them with her two hands
to an orb, as nearly resembling the full moon as she could. You must
likewise have remarked, that while engaged in this becoming part of her
avocation, she was never once looking at her work, but that while her
head had that sly cast to the one side, her eyes were ever and anon
fixed on the window, noting what was going on without, looking perhaps
for her lad coming from the hill, or whistling at the plough. If you
have ever seen this, you can easily comprehend the attitude I mean--if
you have never, it is a great pity!

Exactly in such a situation stood our honest farmer, Robin Muckerland,
plying his bonnet round with both hands in the same way--his head was
likewise turned to one side, and his eyes immoveably fixed on the
window--it was the girl's position to a hair. Let any man take his pen
and describe the two attitudes, there is not the slightest shade of
difference to be discerned--the one knee of both is even slackened and
bent gently forward, the other upright and firm, by its own weight made
steadfast and immoveable. Yet how it comes I do not comprehend, and
should like much to consult my friend, David Wilkie, about it--it is
plain that the attitudes are precisely the same, yet the girl's is quite
delightful--Robin's was perfectly pitiable. He had not one word to say,
but baked his bonnet and stood thus.

"This is my determination," continued Lindsey, "and you may pay what
attention to it you please."

"Od, sir, I'm excessively vexed at what has happened, now when ye hae
letten me see it in its true light, an' I sal do what I can to find her
again, an' mak her what amends I am able. But, od ye see, naebody kens
where she's ye see. She may be gane into the wild Highlands, or away to
that outlandish country ayont the sea that they ca' Fife, an' how am I
to get her? therefore, if I canna an' dinna get her, I hope you will
excuse me, especially as neither the contrivance nor the act was mine."

"You and my honoured mother settle that betwixt you. I will not abate a
tittle of that I have said; but, to encourage your people in the search,
or whomsoever you are pleased to employ, I shall give ten guineas to the
person who finds her and restores her to her home."

"Aweel, son Lindsey," said the lady, moving her head like the pendulum
of a clock, "your mother meant ye good, an' nae ill, in what she has
done; but them that will to Cupar maun to Cupar. For the sake o' Robin
and his family, and no for the neighbourhood o' this whilly-wha of a
young witch, I shall gi'e the body that finds her half as muckle."

"And I," said Robin, "shall gi'e the same, which will make up the reward
to twenty guineas, an' it is mair than I can weel spare in sic hard
times. I never saw better come o' women's schemes, as I say whiles to my
titty Meg."

The company parted, not on the most social terms; and that night, before
Robin dismissed his servants to their beds, he said, "Lads, my master
informs me that I am to be plaguit wi' the law for putting away that
lassie Jeany an' her bit brat atween term-days. I gi'e ye a' your
liberty frae my wark until the end o' neist week, if she be not found
afore that time, to search for her; and whoever finds her, and brings
her back to her cottage, shall have a reward o' twenty guineas in his
loof."

A long conversation then ensued on the best means of recovering her; but
Barnaby did not wait on this, but hasted away to the stable loft, where
his chest stood at the head of his bed, dressed himself in his Sunday
clothes, and went without delay to the nearest stage where horses were
let out for hire, got an old brown hack equipped with a bridle, saddle,
and pad, and off he set directly for his father's cottage, where he
arrived next morning by the time the sun was up.

To describe all Barnaby's adventures that night would take a volume by
itself, for it was the very country of the ghosts and fairies that he
traversed. As his errand was, however, solely for good, he was afraid
for none of them meddling with him, save the devil and the water-kelpie;
yet so hardly was he beset with these at times, that he had no other
resource but to shut his eyes close, and push on his horse. He by this
resolute contrivance got on without interruption, but had been so near
his infernal adversaries at times, that twice or thrice he felt a glow
on his face as if a breath of lukewarm air had been breathed against it,
and a smell exactly resembling (he did not like to say brimstone, but)
_a coal fire just gaun out_!--But it is truly wonderful what a man, with
a conscience void of offence towards God and towards his neighbour, will
go through!

When the day-light began to spring up behind the hills of Glenrath, what
a blithe and grateful man was Barnaby! "The bogles will be obliged to
thraw aff their black claes now," said he, "an' in less than half an
hour the red an' the green anes too. They'll hae to pit on their
pollonians o' the pale colour o' the fair day-light, that the e'e o'
Christian maunna see them; or gang away an' sleep in their dew-cups an'
foxter-leaves till the gloaming come again. O, but the things o' this
warld are weel contrived!"

Safely did he reach the glen, at the head of which his father's cottage
stood, with its little kail-yard in the forkings of the burn; there was
no dog, nor even little noisy pup, came out to give note of his
approach, for his father and canine friends had all gone out to the
heights at a very early hour to look after the sheep. The morning was
calm and lovely; but there was no sound in the glen save the voice of
his mother's grey cock, who was perched on the kail-yard dike, and
crowing incessantly. The echoes were answering him distinctly from the
hills; and as these aerial opponents were the only ones he ever in his
life had to contend with, he had learned to value himself extremely on
his courage, and was clapping his wings, and braving them in a note
louder and louder. Barnaby laughed at him, although he himself had been
struggling with beings as unreal and visionary during the whole night;
so ready we are to see the follies of others, yet all the while to
overlook our own!

The smoke was issuing from his mother's chimney in a tall blue spire
that reached to the middle of the hill; but when there, it spread
itself into a soft hazy cloud, and was resting on the side of the green
brae in the most still and moveless position. The rising sun kissed it
with his beams, which gave it a light woolly appearance, something like
floating down; it was so like a vision that Barnaby durst scarcely look
at it. "My mither's asteer," said he to himself, "I ken by her morning
reek; she'll be fiking up an' down the house, an' putting a' things to
rights; an' my billies they'll be lying grumphing and snoring i' their
dens, an' Jeany will be lying waking, listening what's gaun on, an' wee
George will be sniffing an' sleeping sound in her bosom. Now I think, of
a' things i' the warld a young mother an' her first son is the maist
interesting--if she has been unfortunate it is ten times mair sae--to
see how she'll sit an' look at him!--(here Barnaby blew his nose.)--I
was my mother's first son; if she had been as bonny, an' as gentle, an'
as feele as Jeany, aih! but I wad hae likit weel!"

No one being aware of Barnaby's approach, he rode briskly up to the door
and rapped, causing at the same time his horse's feet make a terrible
clamping on the stones. His mother, who had been sweeping the house,
came running out with the heather besom in her hand. "Bless my heart,
callant, is that you? Sic a gliff as I hae gotten w'ye! What's asteer
w'ye? or whar ir ye gaun sae early i' the morning on that grand
cut-luggit beast?"

"I'm turned a gentleman now, mother, that's a'; an' I thought I wad g'ye
a ca' as I gaed by for auld lang syne--Hope ye're all well?"

"Deed we're a' no that ill. But, dear Barny, what ir ye after?--Hae ye
a' your senses about ye?"

"I thank ye, I dinna miss ony o' them that I notice. I'm come for my
wife that I left w'ye--How is she?"

"_Your_ wife! Weel I wat ye'll never get the like o' her, great muckle
hallanshaker-like guff."

"Haud your tongue now, mother, ye dinna ken wha I may get; but I can
tell ye o' something that I'm to get. If I take hame that lassie Jeany
safe to her house, ony time these ten days, there's naebody kens where I
hae her hidden, an' I'm to get twenty guineas in my loof for doing o't."

"Ay, I tauld ye sae, my dear bairn."

"Ye never tauld me sic a word, mother."

"I hae tauld ye oft, that ae good turn never misses to meet wi' another,
an' that the king may come i' the beggar's way."

"Ramsay's Scots Proverbs tell me that."

"It will begin a bit stock to you, my man; an' I sal say it o' her, gin
I sude never see her face again, she's the best creature, ae way an' a'
ways, that ever was about a poor body's house. Ah, God bless her!--she's
a dear creature!--Ye'll never hae cause to rue, my man, the pains ye hae
ta'en about her."

Jane was very happy at meeting with her romantic and kind-hearted
Barnaby again, who told her such a turn as affairs had taken in her
favour, and all that the laird had said to him about her, and the
earnest enquiries he had made; and likewise how he had put Robin to his
shifts. She had lived very happy with these poor honest people, and had
no mind to leave them; indeed, from the day that she entered their house
she had not harboured a thought of it; but now, on account of her
furniture, which was of considerable value to her, and more particularly
for the sake of Barnaby's reward, she judged it best to accompany him.
So after they had all taken a hearty breakfast together at the same
board, the old shepherd returned thanks to the Bestower of all good
things, and then kissing Jane, he lifted her on the horse behind his
son. "Now fare-ye-weel, Jeany woman," said he; "I think you will be
happy, for I'm sure you deserve to be sae. If ye continue to mind the
thing that's good, there is Ane wha will never forsake ye; I come surety
for him. An' if ever adversity should again fa' to your lot, ye shall be
as welcome to our bit house as ever, and to your share o' ilka thing
that's in it; an' if I should see you nae mair, I'll never bow my knee
before my Maker without remembering you. God bless you, my bonny woman!
Fareweel."

Jane dropped a tear on her benefactor's hand, for who could stand such
unaffected goodness? Barnaby, who had folded his plaid and held little
George on it before him, turned his face towards the other side of the
horse, and contracted it into a shape and contortion that is not often
seen, every feature being lengthened extremely the cross way; but after
blowing his nose two or three times he recovered the use of his rod,
with which he instantly began a thrashing his nag, that he might get out
of this flood of tenderness and leave-taking. It is not easy to conceive
a more happy man than he was that day, he was so proud of his parents'
kindness to Jane, and of the good he thought he was doing to all
parties, and, besides, the twenty guineas was a fortune to him. He went
on prating to George, who was quite delighted with the ride on such a
grand horse; yet at times he grew thoughtful, and testified his regret
for the horse, lest he should be tired with carrying them all. "Geoge
vely solly fol poole holse, Balny! Geoge no like to be a holse."

Many were the witch and fairy tales that Barnaby related that day to
amuse his fellow travellers. He set down Jane and George safe at their
cottage before evening, and astonished Robin not a little, who was
overjoyed to see his lost gimmer and lamb (as he termed them,) so soon.
He paid Barnaby his twenty guineas that night in excellent humour,
making some mention, meantime, of an old proverb, "They that hide ken
where to seek," and without delay sent information to the mansion-house
that Jane was found, and safely arrived at her own house, a piece of
news which created no little stir at Earlhall.

The old lady had entertained strong hopes that Jane would not be found;
or that she would refuse to return after the treatment she had met
with, and the suspicions that were raised against her; in short, she
wished her not to return, and she hoped she would not; but now all her
fond hopes were extinguished, and she could see no honourable issue to
the affair. It was like to turn out a love intrigue; a low and shameful
business, her son might pretend what he chose. She instantly lost all
command of her temper, hurried from one part of the house to another,
quarrelled with every one of the maid servants, and gave the two
prettiest ones warning to leave their places.

Lindsey was likewise a little out of his reason that night, but his
feelings were of a very different kind. He loved all the human race; he
loved the little birds that sung upon the trees almost to distraction.
The deep blue of the heavens never appeared so serene--the woods, the
fields, and the flowers, never so delightful! such a new and
exhilarating tone did the return of this beautiful girl (child, I mean)
give to his whole vital frame. "What a delightful world this is!" said
he to himself; "and how happy might all its inhabitants live, if they
would suffer themselves to do so!" He did not traverse the different
apartments of the house with the same hasty steps as his mother did, but
he took many rapid turns out to the back garden, and in again to the
parlour.

In the middle of one of these distant excursions his ears were assailed
by the discordant tones of anger and reproach--Proud and haughty
contumely on the one side, and the bitter complaints of wronged but
humble dependance on the other.

"This is some one of my mother's unreasonable imputations," said he to
himself; "it is hard that the fairer and more delicate part of my
servants, who are in fact _my_ servants, receiving meat and wages from
me, and whom I most wish to be happy and comfortable in their
circumstances should be thus harassed and rendered miserable--I will
interfere in spite of all obloquy." He went in to the fore-kitchen,
"What is the matter? What is the meaning of all this disturbance here?"

"Matter, son! The matter is, that I will not be thus teased and wronged
by such a worthless scum of menials as your grieve has buckled on me. I
am determined to be rid of them for the present, and to have no more
servants of his hiring."

So saying, she bustled away by him, and out of the kitchen. Sally, one
of the maidens that wrought afield, whose bright complexion and sly
looks had roused the lady's resentment, was standing sobbing in a
corner. "What is this you have done, Sally, thus to irritate my mother?"

"I hae done naething ava that's wrang, sir; but she's never aff my tap;
an' I'm glad I'm now free frae her. Had she tauld me my fault, an'
turned me away, I wad never hae regrettit; but she has ca'd me names
sic afore a' these witnesses, that I'll never get mair service i' the
country. I see nae right ony body has to guide poor servants this gate."

"Nor I either, Sally; but say no more about it; I know you to be a very
faithful and conscientious servant, for I have often enquired; remain in
your place, and _do not_ go away--remember I order it--give no offence
to my mother that you can avoid--be a good girl, as you have heretofore
been, and here is a guinea to buy you a gown at next fair."

"Oh, God bless him for a kind good soul!" said Sally, as he went out,
and the benediction was echoed from every corner of the kitchen.

He rambled more than half-way up the river side to Todburn; but
it was too late to call and see _the dear child_ that night, so he
returned--joined his mother at supper; was more than usually gay and
talkative, and at last proposed to invite this fair rambler down to
Earlhall to breakfast with them next morning. The lady was almost
paralyzed by this proposal, and groaned in spirit!

"Certainly, son! certainly! your house is your ain; invite ony body to
it you like; nane has a better right! a man may keep ony company he
chooses. Ye'll hae nae objections, I fancy, that I keep out o' the
party?"

"Very great objections, mother; I wish to see this girl, and learn her
history; if I call privately, you will be offended; is it not better to
do this before witnesses? And I am likewise desirous that you should see
her, and be satisfied that she is at all events worthy of being
protected from injury. Let us make a rustic party of it, for a little
variety--we will invite Robin, and his sister Miss Margaret, and any
other of that class you chuse."

"O certainly! invite them ilk ane, son--invite a' the riff-raff i' the
parish; your mother has naething to say."

He was stung with this perversity, as well as with his love for _the
child_ on the other hand--he did invite them, and the invitation was
accepted. Down came Robin Muckerland, tenant of the Todburn, dressed in
his blue and gray thread-about coat, with metal buttons, broader than a
Queen Ann's half-crown, dark corduroy breeches, and drab-coloured
leggums (the best things, by the bye, that ever came in fashion;) and
down came haverel Meg, his sister, _alias_ Miss Peggy, for that day,
with her cork-heeled shoon, and long-waisted gown, covered with broad
stripes, like the hangings of an ancient bed. She had, moreover, a
silken bonnet on her head for laying aside in the lobby, under that a
smart cap, and under that, again, an abundance of black curly hair,
slightly grizzled, and rendered more outrageously bushy that morning by
the effects of paper-curls over night. Meg was never seen dressed in
such style before, and I wish from my heart that any assembly of our
belles had seen her. She viewed the business as a kind of _show of
cattle_ before the laird, in the same way as the young ladies long ago
were brought in before King Ahasuerus; and she was determined to bear
down Jane to the dust, and carry all before her. The very air and
swagger with which she walked was quite delightful, while her blue
ribbon-belt, half a foot broad, and proportionally long, having been
left intentionally loose, was streaming behind her, like the pennon of a
ship. "It is rather odd, billy Rob," said she, "that we should thus be
invited alang wi' our ain cottar--However, the laird's ha' levels a'--if
she be fit company for him, she maunna be less for us--fock maun bow to
the bush that they seek beild frae."

"E'en sae, Meg; but let us see you behave yoursel like a woman the day,
an' no get out wi' ony o' your vollies o' nonsense."

"Deed, Rob, I'll just speak as I think; there sall naething gyzen i' my
thrapple that my noddle pits there. I like nane o' your kind o' fock
that dare do naething but chim chim at the same thing ower again, like
the gouk in a June day. Meg maun hae out her say, if it sude burst
Powbeit on her head."

As they came down by the washing-green, Jane joined them, dressed in a
plain brown frock, and leading little George, who was equipt like an
earl's son; and a prettier boy never paddled at a mother's side.

The old lady was indisposed that day, and unable to come down to
breakfast; and it was not till after the third visit from her son, who
found he was like to be awkwardly situated with his party, that she was
prevailed on to appear. Robin entered first, and made his obeisance; Meg
came in with a skip and a courtesy, very like that of the water-owzel
when she is sitting on a stone in the middle of the stream. Poor Jane
appeared last, leading her boy; her air was modest and diffident, yet it
had nothing of that awkward timidity, inseparable from low life, and a
consciousness that one has no right to be there. The lady returned a
slight nod to her courtesy, for she had nearly dropt down when she first
cast her eyes upon her beauty, and elegance of form and manner. It was
the last hope that she had remaining, that this girl would be a vulgar
creature, and have no pretensions to that kind of beauty admired in the
higher circles; now that last hope was blasted. But that which
astonished every one most, was the brilliancy of her eyes, which all her
misfortunes had nothing dimmed; their humid lustre was such, that it was
impossible for any other eye to meet their glances without withdrawing
abashed. The laird set a seat for her, and spoke to her as easily as he
could, but of that he was no great master; he then lifted little George,
kissed him, and, setting him on his knee, fell a talking to him. "And
where have you been so long away from me, my dear little fellow? Tell me
where you have been all this while."

"Fal away, at auld Geoldie's, little Davie's falel, ye ken; him 'at
has 'e fine bonny 'halp wi' a stipe down hele, and anolel down
hele.--Little Davie vely good till Geoge, an vely queel callant."

Every one laughed aloud at George's description of the whelp, and his
companion little Davie, save Jane, who was afraid he would discover
where their retreat had been, rather prematurely. Breakfast was served;
the old lady forced a complaisance and chatted to Meg, who answered her
just with what chanced to come uppermost, never once to the point or
subject on which she was previously talking; for all the time the good
old dowager was addressing her, she was busied in adjusting some part of
her dress--looking at the shape of her stays--casting a glance at the
laird, and occasionally at Jane--then adjusting a voluptuous curl that
half-hid her grey eye. She likewise occasionally uttered a vacant hem!
when the lady paused; and, as soon as she ceased, began some observation
of her own. Robin was quite in the fidgets. "Dear Meg, woman, that's no
what her ladyship was speaking about. That's no to the purpose ava."

"Speak ye to the purpose then, Rob. Ye think naebody can speak but
yoursel, hummin an' hawin. Let us hear how weel ye'll speak to the
purpose.--Whisht, sirs! haud a' your tongues; my billy Rob's gaun to mak
a speech."

"Humph!" quoth Robin, and gave his head a cast round.

"Humph!" returned Meg, "what kind of a speech is that? Is that to the
purpose? If that be to the purpose, a sow could hae made that speech as
weel as you, and better. The truth is, mem, that our Rob's aye wantin to
be on his hich horse afore grit folk; now I says till him, Rob, says I,
for you to fa' to afore your betters, and be tryin to speak that vile
nicky-nacky language they ca' English, instead o' being on your hich
horse then, ye are just like a heron walkin on stilts, an' that's but a
daft-like beast. Ye sude mind, says I,--Rob, man, says I, that her
ladyship's ane o' our ain kind o' fock, an' was bred at the same heck
an' manger wi' oursels; an' although she has lightit on a good
tethering, ye're no to think that she's to gi'e hersel airs, an' forget
the good auld haemilt blude that rins in her veins."

The lady's cheek was burning with indignation, for, of all topics, Meg
was fallen on the most unlucky; nothing hurt her feelings half so much
as hints of her low extraction. Lindsey, though vexed, could not repress
a laugh at the proud offence on the one side, and the untameable
vulgarity on the other. Meg discerned nothing wrong, and, if she had,
would not have regarded it. She went on. "Ah, Meg, woman! quo' he, ye
ken little thing about it, quo' he; when the sole of a shoe's turned
uppermost, it maks aye but an unbowsome overleather; if ye corn an auld
glide-aver weel, she'll soon turn about her heels, and fling i' your
face."

Robin's whole visage changed; his eyes were set on Meg, but his brows
were screwed down, and his cheeks pursed up in such a manner, that those
were scarcely discernible; his mouth had meanwhile assumed the form and
likeness of one of the long S's on the belly of a fiddle. Meg still went
on. "Dear Rob, says I, man, says I, that disna apply to her ladyship
ava, for every thing that she does, an' every thing that she says, shows
her to be a douse hamely body; the very way that she rins bizzin through
the house, an' fliting on the servants, proves that she maks nae
pretensions to high gentility."

Lindsey, who now dreaded some explosion of rage subversive of all
decorum, began and rallied Meg, commended her flow of spirits and fresh
looks, and said she was very much of a lady herself.

"I wat, laird," said she, "I think aye if a body behaves wi' ease, an'
without ony stiffness an' precision, that body never behaves ill; but,
to be sure, you grand fock can say an' do a hantle o' things that winna
be ta'en aff our hands. For my part, when the great fike rase about you
an' Jeany there, I says--says I"----

This was a threatening preface. Lindsey durst not stand the sequel. "I
beg your pardon for the present, Miss Peggy," said he; "we shall attend
to your observations on this topic after we have prepared the way for it
somewhat. I was, and still am convinced, that this young woman received
very harsh and unmerited treatment from our two families. I am desirous
of making her some reparation, and to patronize her, as well as this
boy, if I find her in any degree deserving of it. This protection shall,
moreover, be extended to her in a manner that neither suspicion nor
blame shall attach to it; and, as we are all implicated in the wrong, I
have selected you as judges in this matter.--It is impossible,"
continued he, addressing himself to Jane, "to be in your company half an
hour, and not discern that your education has been much above the
sphere of life which you now occupy; but I trust you will find us all
disposed to regard you with the eye of friendship, if you will be so
good as relate to us the incidents of your life which have contributed
to your coming among us."

"The events of my life, sir," said she, "have been, like the patriarch's
days, few and evil, and my intention was, never to have divulged them in
this district--not on my own account, but for the sake of their names
that are connected with my history, and are now no more. Nevertheless,
since you have taken such an interest in my fortunes, it would both be
ungrateful and imprudent to decline giving you that satisfaction. Excuse
me for the present in withholding my family name, and I will relate to
you the incidents of my short life in a very few words.

"My father was an eminent merchant. Whether ever he was a rich one or
not I cannot tell, but he certainly was looked upon as such, for his
credit and dealings were very extensive. My mother died twelve years
ago, leaving my father with no more children than another daughter and
myself. I received my education in Edinburgh along with my sister, who
was two years older than I. She began to manage my father's household
affairs at thirteen years of age, and I went to reside with an aunt in
East-Lothian, who had been married to a farmer, but was now a widow, and
occupied a farm herself.

"Whether it originated in his not finding any amusement at home, or in
consciousness of his affairs getting into confusion, I know not, but our
father about this time fell by degrees from attending to his business in
a great measure, and sunk into despondency. My sister's letters to me
were full of regret; my aunt being in a declining state of health I
could not leave her for some months. At last she died, leaving me a
legacy of five hundred pounds, when I hastened home, and did all in my
power to assist my sister in comforting our father, but he did not long
survive, and dying insolvent, we not only lost our protector, but had
nothing to depend on save my little legacy and our own industry and
exertions. We retired to a small lodging; none of our friends thought
proper to follow us to our retreat; and now, bereaved as we were of our
natural protector, we could not help perceiving that we were a
friendless and helpless pair. My sister never recovered her spirits; a
certain dejection and absence of mind from this time forth began to prey
upon her, and it was with real sorrow and concern that I perceived it
daily gaining ground, and becoming more and more strongly marked. I
tried always to console her as much as I could for our loss, and often,
to cheer her, assumed a gaiety that was foreign to my heart; but we
being quite solitary, her melancholy always returned upon her with
double weight. About this time I first saw a young officer with my
sister, who introduced him carelessly to me as _the Captain_. She went
out with him, and when she returned I asked who he was. "Bless me,
Jane," said she, "do you not know the Captain?" I was angry at the
flippancy of her manner, but she gave me no further satisfaction."

At the mention of this officer Lindsey grew restless and impatient,
changing his position on the seat every moment.

"Things went on in this manner," continued Jane, "for some time longer,
and still my sister grew more heartless and dejected. Her colour grew
pale, and her eye heavy, and I could not help feeling seriously alarmed
on her account.

"For nine or ten days she went out by herself for an hour or so every
day, without informing me where she had been. But one morning, when I
arose my sister was gone. I waited until noon before I took any
breakfast; but nothing of my sister appearing, I became distracted with
dreadful apprehensions. I went about to every place where I thought
there was the least chance of hearing any news of her, yet durst I not
ask for her openly at any one for fear of the answer I might receive;
for, on considering the late dejected state of her mind, I expected
nothing else than to hear that she had put an end to her existence. My
search was fruitless; night came, and still no word of my sister; I
passed it without sleep; but, alas! the next night, and many others,
came and past over without bringing a trace of her steps, or throwing a
gleam of light on her fate. I was now obliged to set on foot a strict
and extensive search, and even to have her advertised; yet still all my
exertions proved of no avail.

"During this long and dreadful pause of uncertainty I thought there
could not be conceived a human being more thoroughly wretched than I
was. Only seventeen years of age; the last of all my father's house;
left in a lodging by myself; all my neighbours utter strangers to me,
and not a friend on earth to whom I could unbosom my griefs; wretched I
was, and deemed it impossible to be more so; but I had over-rated my
griefs, and was punished for my despondency.

"When some months had passed away, one spring morning, I remember it
well! after a gentle rap at the door, the maid entered, and said, _a
man_ wanted to see me. 'A man!' said I; 'What man wishes to speak with
me?'

"'I don't know, mem, he is like a countryman.'

"He was shown in; a pale man, of a dark complexion, and diminutive size.
I was certain I had never seen him before, for his features were
singularly marked. He asked my name, and seemed at a loss to deliver his
message, and there was something in his air and manner that greatly
alarmed me. 'So you said your name is so so?' said he again.

"'I did; pray, tell me what is your business with me?'

"'There is a lady at our house, who I suppose wishes to speak with
you.'

"'What lady wishes to see me? Where is your house?'

"He named some place on the London road towards Berwick.

"'What lady can possibly be there,' said I, 'that knows any thing of
me?'

"He looked at me again.--'Pray, mem, have you a sister? Or had you ever
any that you know of?'

"This query paralyzed me. I sunk down on the sofa; but as soon as I
could speak, I asked how long the lady had been with him?

"'Only since Friday evening last,' said he. 'She was taken ill at the
inn on her way to Edinburgh, from whence she was conveyed to my house,
for the sake of better and more quiet accommodation; but she has been
very ill,--_very_ ill, indeed. There is now hope that she will recover,
but she is still _very_ ill. I hope you are the lady she named when all
was given over; at all events, you must go and see.'

"Scarcely knowing what I did, I desired the man to call a post-chaise.
We reached the place before even. I entered her apartment, breathless
and impatient; but how shall I relate to you the state in which I found
her! My heart bleeds to this day, when remembrance presents me with the
woeful spectacle! She was lying speechless, unable to move a hand or
lift an eye, and posting on, with rapid advances, to eternity, having
some days before been delivered of this dear child on my knee."

At this moment the eyes of all the circle were fixed on Jane, expressing
strongly a mixture of love, pity, and admiration. Lindsey could contain
himself no longer. He started to his feet--stretched his arms toward
her, and, after gasping a little for breath,--"Wh--wh--what!" said he,
sighing, "are you not then the _mother_ of little George?"

"A poor substitute only for a better, sir; but the only parent he has
ever known, or is likely to know."

"And you have voluntarily suffered all these privations, trouble, and
shame, for the sake of a poor little orphan, who, it seems, is no nearer
a kin to you than a nephew? If ever the virtuous principles and
qualities of a female mind deserved admiration--But proceed. I am much
to blame for interrupting you."

"I never for another moment departed from my sister's bed-side until she
breathed her last, which she did in about thirty hours after my arrival.
During that time, there was only once that she seemed to recollect or
take the slightest notice of me, which was a little before her final
exit; but then she gave me such a look!--So full of kindness and sorrow,
that language could not have expressed her feelings half so forcibly. It
was a farewell look, which is engraven on the tablets of my mind, never
to be obliterated while that holds intercourse with humanity.

"The shock which my feelings received by the death of the only friend of
my heart, with the mysterious circumstances which accompanied it,
deprived me for some time of the powers of recollection. My dreams by
night, and my reflections during the day, were all so much blent and
inter-mingled, and so wholly of the same tendency, that they became all
as a dream together; so that I could not, on a retrospect, discover in
the least, nor ever can to this day, what part of my impressions were
real, or what were mere phantasy, so strongly were the etchings of fancy
impressed on my distempered mind. If the man I mentioned before, who
owned the house, had not looked after the necessary preparations for the
funeral, I know not how or when it would have been set about by any
orders of mine. They soon enticed me away from the body, which they
suffered me to visit but seldom, and, it seems, I was perfectly passive.
That such a thing as my sister's funeral was approaching, occurred but
rarely to my mind, and then, it in a manner surprised me as a piece of
unexpected intelligence was wont to do, and it as suddenly slipped
away, leaving my imagination again to wander in a maze of inextricable
confusion.

"The first thing that brought me to myself was a long fit of incessant
weeping, in which I shed abundance of tears. I then manifested an
ardent desire to see the child, which I recollect perfectly well. I
considered him as the only remembrance left to me of a respectable and
well-descended family, and of the dearest friend ever I remembered upon
earth. When I first saw him, he was lying on an old woman's knee; and
when I stooped to look at him, he, with a start of his whole frame,
fixed his young unstable eyes on me, and stretched out his little spread
hands toward me, in which position he remained steadily for a
considerable time. This was so marked and uncommon, that all the
standers-by took notice of it; and the woman who held him said, 'See!
saw ye ever the like o' that? I never saw the like o' that a' my life!
It is surely impossible he can ken ye?'

"It was, without doubt, an involuntary motion of the babe, but I could
not help viewing it as a movement effected by the Great Spirit of
universal nature. I thought I saw the child beseeching me to protect his
helpless innocence, and not to abandon him to an injurious world, in
which he had not another friend remaining, until he could think and act
for himself. I adopted him that moment in my heart as my son--I took him
into my arms as a part of myself!--That simple motion of my dear child
fixed my resolution with respect to him at once, and that resolution
never has been altered nor injured in the smallest part.

"I hired a nurse for him; and, it being term time, gave up my house, and
sold all my furniture, save the little that I have still, and retired to
a cottage at Slateford, not far from Edinburgh. Here I lived frugally
with the nurse and child; and became so fond of him, that no previous
period of my life, from the days of childhood, was ever so happy;
indeed, my happiness was centered solely in him, and if he was well, all
other earthly concerns vanished. I found, however, that after paying the
rent of the house, the expences of the two funerals, and the nurse's
wages, that my little stock was reduced nearly one-third; and fearing
that it would in a little while be wholly exhausted, I thought the
sooner I reconciled myself to hardships the better; so leaving the
remainder of my money in the bank as a fund in case of sickness or great
necessity, I came and took this small cottage and garden from your
farmer. I had no ambition but that of bringing up the child, and
educating him, independent of charitable assistance; and I cannot
describe to you how happy I felt at the prospect, that the interest of
my remaining property, with the small earnings of my own industry, was
likely to prove more than an equivalent to my yearly expences. I have
from the very first acknowledged little George as my own son. I longed
for a retirement, where I should never be recognised by any former
acquaintance. In such a place I thought my story might gain credit; nor
could I think in any degree to stain the name of my dear departed sister
by any surmises or reflections that might in future attach to it by
telling the story as it was. How I should have felt had he really been
my son, I cannot judge; but instead of feeling any degradation at being
supposed his mother, so wholly is my existence bound up in him, that I
could not bear the contrary to be supposed.

"Who his father is, remains a profound, and, to me, unaccountable
mystery. I never had the slightest suspicion of the rectitude of her
behaviour, and cannot understand to this day how she could possibly
carry on an amour without suffering me to perceive any signs of it. She
had spoke but little to the people with whom I found her; but their
impressions were, that she was not married, and I durst not enquire
farther; for, rather than have discovered his father to be unworthy, I
chose to remain in utter ignorance concerning it, and I could not think
favourably of one who had deserted her in such circumstances. There was
no man whom I had ever seen that I could in the least suspect, if it was
not the young officer that I formerly mentioned, and he was the least
likely to be guilty of such an act of any man I ever saw."

Here Lindsey again sprung to his feet. "Good God!" said he, "there is
something occurs to my mind--the most extraordinary circumstance--if it
be really so. You wished to be excused from giving your surname, but
there is a strange coincidence in your concerns with my own, which
renders it absolutely necessary that I should be informed of this."

Jane hesitated, and said she could not think of divulging that so as to
make it public, but that she would trust his honour, and tell it him in
his ear. She then whispered the name M'----y.

"What!" said he aloud, forgetting the injunction of secrecy, "of the
late firm M'----, Reynolds and Co.?"

"The same, sir."

The positions into which he now threw himself, and the extravagant
exclamations that he uttered, cannot here be all described. The other
three personages in the room all supposed that he was gone out of his
reason. After repeating, till quite out of breath, "It is she! it is
she! it is the same! it is the same!" and, pressing both her hands in
his, he exclaimed, "Eternal Providence! how wonderful are thy ways, and
how visible is thy superintendance of human affairs, even in the common
vicissitudes of life! but never was it so visible as in this! My dear
child," continued he, taking little George in his arms, who looked at
him with suspicion and wonder, "by how many fatal and untoward events,
all seemingly casual, art thou at last, without the aid of human
interference, thrown into the arms of thy natural guardian! and how
firmly was my heart knit to thee from the very first moment I saw thee!
But thou art my own son, and shalt no more leave me; nor shall your
beautiful guardian either, if she will accept of a heart that her
virtues have captivated. This house shall henceforth be a home to you
both, and all my friends shall be friends to you, for you are my own."

Here the old lady sprung forward, and, laying hold of her son by the
shoulder, endeavoured to pull him away. "Consider what you are saying,
Lindsey, and what you are bringing on yourself, and your name, and your
family. You are raving mad--that child can no more be yours than it is
mine. Will you explain yourself, or are we to believe that you have
indeed lost your reason? I say, where is the consistency in supposing
that child can be yours?"

"It is impossible," said Robin.

"I say it's nae sic a thing as unpossible, Rob," quoth Meg. "Hand your
tongue, ye ken naething about it--it's just as possible that it may be
his as another's--I sal warrant whaever be aught it, it's no comed there
by sympathy! Od, if they war to come by sympathy"----

Here Meg was interrupted by Lindsey, who waved his hand for silence,--a
circumstance that has sorely grieved the relater of this tale,--for of
all things he would have liked to have had Meg's ideas, at full length,
of children being produced by sympathy.

"I beg your pardon," said Lindsey. "I must have appeared extravagant in
my rapturous enthusiasm, having forgot but that you knew all the
circumstances as well as myself. The whole matter is, however, very
soon, and very easily explained."

He then left the room, and all the company gazing upon one another. Jane
scarcely blushed on receiving the vehement proffer from Lindsey, for his
rhapsody had thrown her into a pleasing and tender delirium of
amazement, which kept every other feeling in suspense.

In a few seconds he returned, bringing an open letter in his
hand.--"Here is the last letter," said he, "ever I received from my
brave and only brother; a short extract from which will serve fully to
clear up the whole of this very curious business."

He then read as follows:--"Thus, you see, that for the last fortnight
the hardships and perils we have encountered have been many and
grievous; but TO-MORROW will be decisive one way or another. I have a
strong prepossession that I will not survive the battle; yea, so deeply
is the idea impressed on my mind, that with me it amounts to an absolute
certainty; therefore, I must confide a secret with you which none in the
world know, or in the least think of, save another and myself. I was
privately married before I left Scotland, to a young lady, lovely in her
person, and amiable in her manners, but without any fortune. We
resolved, for reasons that must be obvious to you, to keep our marriage
a secret, until I entered to the full possession of my estate, and if
possible till my return; but now, (don't laugh at me, my dear brother,)
being convinced that I shall never return, I entreat you, as a last
request, to find her out and afford her protection. It is probable, that
by this time she may stand in need of it. Her name is Amelia M'----y,
daughter to the late merchant of that name of the firm M'----y and
Reynolds. She left her home with me in private, at my earnest request,
though weeping with anguish at leaving a younger sister, a little angel
of mercy, whom, like the other, you will find every way worthy of your
friendship and protection. The last letter that I had from her was dated
from London, the 7th of April, on which day she embarked in the packet
for Leith, on her way to join her sister, in whose house, near
Bristo-Port, you will probably find her. Farewell, dear brother. Comfort
our mother; and O, for my sake, cherish and support my dear wife! We
have an awful prospect before us, but we are a handful of brave
determined friends, resolved to conquer or die together."

The old lady now snatched little George up in her arms, pressed him to
her bosom, and shed abundance of tears over him.--"He is indeed my
grandson! he is! he is!" cried she. "My own dear George's son, and he
shall henceforth be cherished as my own."

"And he shall be mine too, mother," added Lindsey; "and heir of
all the land which so rightly belongs to him. And she, who has so
disinterestedly adopted and brought up the heir of Earlhall, shall still
be his mother, if she will accept of a heart that renders her virtues
every homage, and beats in unison with her own to every tone of pity and
benevolence."

Jane now blushed deeply, for the generous proposal was just made while
the tears of joy were yet trickling over her cheeks on account of the
pleasing intelligence she had received of the honour of her regretted
sister, and the rank of her child.--She could not answer a word--she
looked stedfastly at the carpet, through tears, as if examining how it
was wrought--then at a little pearl ring she wore on her finger, and
finally fell to adjusting some of little George's clothes. They were all
silent--It was a quaker meeting, and might have continued so much
longer, had not the spirit fortunately moved Meg.

"By my certy, laird! but ye hae made her a good offer! an' yet she'll
pretend to tarrow at takin't! But ye're sure o' her, tak my word for
it.--Ye dinna ken women. Bless ye! the young hizzies mak aye the
greatest fike about the things that they wish maist to hae. I ken by
mysel;--when Andrew Pistolfoot used to come stamplin in to court me i'
the dark, I wad hae cried whispering, 'Get away wi' ye! ye bowled-like
shurf!--whar are ye comin pechin an' fuffin to me?' Bless your heart!
gin Andrew had run away when I bade him, I wad hae run after him, an'
grippit him by the coat-tails, an' brought him back. Little wist I this
morning, an' little wist mae than I, that things war to turn out this
way, an' that Jeany was to be our young lady! She was little like it
that night she gaed away greetin wi' the callant on her back! Dear Rob,
man, quo' I to my billy, what had you and my lady to do wi' them?
Because her day an' yours are ower, do ye think they'll no be courting
as lang as the warld stands; an' the less that's said about it the
better--I said sae!"

"And you said truly, Meg," rejoined Lindsey. "Now, pray, Miss Jane, tell
me what you think of my proposal?"

"Indeed, sir," answered she, "you overpower me. I am every way unworthy
of the honour you propose for my acceptance; but as I cannot part with
my dear little George, with your leave I will stay with my lady and take
care of him."

"Well, I consent that you shall stay with my mother as her companion. A
longer acquaintance will confirm that affection, which a concurrence of
events has tended so strongly to excite."

It was not many months until this amiable pair were united in the bonds
of matrimony, and they are still living, esteemed of all their
acquaintances. Barnaby is the laird's own shepherd, and overseer of all
his rural affairs, and he does not fail at times to remind his gentle
mistress of his dream about the _eagle_ and the _corbie_.


END OF THE WOOL-GATHERER.




THE HUNT OF EILDON.

ANCIENT.




CHAPTER I.


"I hope the king will not hunt to-day," said Gale, as he sat down on the
top of the South Eildon, and stretched out his lazy limbs in the sun.
"If he keep within doors to-day with his yelping beagles, I shall have
one day's peace and ease; and my lambs shall have one day's peace and
ease; and poor Trimmy shall have one day's peace and ease too. Come
hither to me, Trimmy, and tell me what is the reason that you will not
hunt with the king's two beagles?"

Trimmy came near, laid her paw on her master's knee, and looked him in
the face, but she could not tell him what was the reason that she would
not hunt with the king's two beagles, Mooly and Scratch.

"I say, tell me my good Trimmy, what you ail at these beautiful hounds?
You wont to be the best follower of a track in all the Merse and Leader;
but now, whenever you hear the sound of the horn, and the opening swell
of the harriers, you take your tail between your legs and set off for
home, as there were something on the hill that were neither good nor
cannie. You are a very sensible beast, Trimmy, but you have some strange
fancies and prejudices that I cannot comprehend."

Trimming cocked her ears, and looked towards the Abbey, then at her
master, and then at the Abbey again.

"Ah! I fear you hear them coming that you are cocking your ears at that
rate. Then if that be the case, good morning to you, Trimmy."

It was neither the king nor his snow-white beagles that Trimmy winded,
but poor Croudy, Gale's neighbour shepherd, who was coming sauntering up
the brae, with his black lumpish dog at his foot, that was fully as
stupid as himself, and withal as good-natured. Croudy was never lifting
his eyes from the ground, but moving on as if he had been enumerating
all the little yellow flowers that grew on the hill. Yet it was not for
want of thought that Croudy was walking in that singular position, with
his body bent forward, and the one ear turned down towards the ground,
and the other up. No, no! for Croudy was trying to think all that he
could; and all that he could do he could make nothing of it. Croudy had
seen and heard wonderful things! "Bless me and my horn!" said he, as he
sat down on a stone to rest himself, and try if he could bring his
thoughts to any rallying point. It was impossible--they were like a hive
of bees when the queen is taken from their head.

He took out the little crooked ewe-horn that he kept as a charm; he had
got it from his mother, and it had descended to him from many
generations; he turned it round in the one hand, and then round in the
other hand--he put it upon his finger and twirled it. "Bless me an' my
horn!" said he again. Then leaning forward upon his staff, he looked
aslant at the ground, and began to moralize. "It is a growing
world--ay--the gerse grows; the lambs eat it--they grow--ay--we eat
them--we grow--there it goes!--men, women, dogs, bairns, a' eat--a'
grow; the yird eats up a'--it grows--men eat women--they grow--what
comes o' them?--Hoh! I'm fixed now!--I'm at the end o' my tether.--I
might gang up the hill to Gale, an' tell him what I hae seen an' what I
hae heard; but I hae four great fauts to that chiel. In the first place,
he's a fool--good that! In the second place, he's a scholar, an' speaks
English--bad! In the third place, he likes the women--warst ava!--and,
fourthly and lastly, he misca's a' the words, and ca's the streamers
the Roara Boriawlis--ha! ha! ha!--Wha wad converse wi' a man, or wha
_can_ converse wi' a man, that ca's the streamers the Roara Boriawlis?
Fools hae aye something about them no like ither fock! Now, gin I war to
gang to sic a man as that, an' tell him that I heard a dog speakin', and
another dog answering it, what wad he say? He wad speak English; sae ane
wad get nae sense out o' him. If I war to gang to the Master o' Seaton
an' tak my aith, what wad he say? Clap me up i' the prison for a daft
man an' a fool. I couldna bide that. Then again, if we lose our
king--an' him the last o' the race--Let me see if I can calculate what
wad be the consequence? The English--Tut! the English! wha cares for
them? But let me see now--should the truth be tauld or no tauld?--That's
the question. What's truth? Ay, there comes the crank! Nae man can tell
that--for what's truth to ane is a lee to another--Mumps, ye're very
hard on thae fleas the day--Truth?--For instance; gin my master war to
come up the brae to me an' say, 'Croudy, that dog's useless,' that wadna
be truth to me--But gin I war to say to him, 'Master, I heard a dog
speak, an' it said sae an' sae; an' there was another dog answered it,
an' it said sae an' sae,' that wad be truth to me; but then it wadna be
truth to him--Truth's just as it is ta'en--Now, if a thing may be outher
truth or no truth, then a' things are just the same--No--that disna haud
neither--Mumps, ye're no gaun to leave a sample o' thae fleas the day,
man--Look up, like a farrant beast--have ye nae pity on your master, nor
nae thought about him ava, an' him in sic a plisky?--I wadna be just sae
like a stump an' I war you, man----Bless me an' my horn! here's the
Boreawlis comin' on me--here's the northern light."

"Good-morrow to you, Croudy."

"Humph!"

"You seem to be very thoughtful and heavy-hearted to-day, honest Croudy.
I fear pretty Pery has given you a bad reception last night."

"Humph!--women!--women!"

"I hope she did not mention the kiln-logie, Croudy? That was a sad
business! Croudy; some men are ill to know!"

"See, whaten white scares are yon, Gale, aboon the Cowdyknowes an'
Gladswood linn? Look ye, they spread an' tail away a' the gate to the
Lammer-Law--What ca' ye yon, Gale?"

"Some exhalation of the morning."

"What?--Bless me an' my horn! that's warst ava!--I thought it wad be
some Boriawlis, Gale--some day Boriawlis; but I didna think o' aught sae
high as this--ha! ha! ha! ha!"

Croudy went his way laughing along the side of the hill, speaking to
Mumps one while, moralizing about truth and the language of dogs and
fairies another, and always between taking a hearty laugh at Gale. "Come
away, Mumps," said he; "I can crack some wi' you, though ye're rather
slow i' the uptake; but I can crack nane wi' a man that ca's the
streamers a Roara Boriawlis, an' a white clud, an' Exaltation--Na, na,
that will never do."

Croudy sauntered away down into the Bourgeon to be out of sight, and
Gale went lightsomely away to the top of the North-east Eildon; and
there, on one of the angles of the old Roman Camp, laid him down to
enjoy the glorious prospect; and, sure, of all the lovely prospects in
our isle, this is the most lovely. What must it have been in those days
when all the ruins of monastery, tower, and citadel, which still make
the traveller to stand in wonder and admiration, were then in their full
splendour. Traveller! would you see Scotland in all its wild and
majestic grandeur? sail along its western firths from south to
north--Would you see that grandeur mellowed by degrees into softness?
look from the top of Ben-Lomond--But would you see an amphitheatre of
_perfect beauty_, where nothing is wanting to enrich the scene? seat
yourself on the spot where Gale now lay, at the angle of the Roman Camp,
on the top of the North-east Eildon.

Short time did he enjoy the prospect and the quiet in which he
delighted. First the heads of two noblemen appeared on the hill beneath
him, then came a roe by him at full speed. Trimmy would fain have hunted
her, but as the shepherd deemed that the business was some way connected
with the royal sport, he restrained her. The two noblemen some time
thereafter sounded a bugle, and then in a moment the king and his
attendants left the Abbey at full speed; and how beautiful was their
winding ascent up the hill! The king had betted with the Earl of Hume
and Lord Belhaven, seven steers, seven palfreys, seven deer-greyhounds,
and seven gold rings, that his two snow-white hounds, Mooly and Scratch,
would kill a roe-deer started on any part of the Eildon hills, and leave
the Abbey walk with him after she was started. After the bet was fairly
taken, the king said to the two noblemen, "You are welcome to your
loss, my lords. Do you know that I could bet the half of my realm on the
heads of these two hounds?"

The two lords held their peace, but they were determined to win if they
could, and they did not blow the horn, as agreed on, immediately when
the roe started, but sauntered about, to put off time, and suffer the
trail to cool. The two hounds were brought up, and loosed at the spot;
they scarcely shewed any symptoms of having discovered the scent. The
king shook his head; and Hume, who loved the joke dearly, jeered the
king about his wager, which his majesty only answered by speaking to one
of the hounds that stood next to him. "Ah! Mooly, Mooly, if you deceive
me, it is the first time; but I have another matter to think on than you
this morning, Mooly." Mooly fawned on her royal master; jumped up at the
stirrup, and took his foot playfully in her mouth, while Keryl, the
king's steed, laid back his ears, and snapped at her, in a half-angry,
half-playful mood. This done, Mooly turned her long nose to the wind;
scented this way and that way, and then scampering carelessly over the
brow of the hill, she opened in a tone so loud and so sprightly that it
made all the Eildons sound in chorus to the music. Scratch joined with
her elegant treble, and away they went like two wild swans, sounding
over the hill.

"Trimmy! Trimmy! my poor Trimmy!" cried Gale, vexed and astonished;
"Trimmy, halloo! hie, hunt the deer, Trimmy! Here, here, here!"

No; Trimmy would never look over her shoulder, but away she ran with all
her might home to Eildon-Hall. "The plague be in the beast," said Gale
to himself, "if ever I saw any thing like that! There is surely
something about these two hounds that is scarcely right."

Round and round the hills they went side by side, and still the riders
kept close up with them. The trail seemed to be warm, and the hounds
keen, but yet no deer was to be discovered. They stretched their course
to the westward, round Cauldshields Hill, back over Bothendean Moor, and
again betook them to the Eildons; still no deer was to be seen! The two
hounds made a rapid stretch down towards Melrose; the riders spurred in
the same direction. The dogs in a moment turning short, went out between
the two eastern hills, distancing all the riders, whom they left
straggling up the steep after them as they could, and when these came
over the height there was a fine roe-deer lying newly slain, and the two
snow-white hounds panting and rolling themselves on the grass beside
her. The king claimed his wager, but Hume objected, unless his majesty
could prove that it was the same deer that they had started at the same
place in the morning. The king had the greatest number of voices in his
favour, but the earl stood to his point. "Is it true, my liege lord,"
said an ancient knight to the king, "that these two beautiful hounds
have never yet been unlieshed without killing their prey?"

"Never," returned the king.

"And is it equally true," continued the old knight, "that to this day
they have never been seen kill either roe, deer, or any other creature?"

"That is a most extraordinary circumstance," said the king; "pause until
I recollect--No; I do not know that any eye hath ever yet seen them take
their prey."

"I heard it averred last night," said the old man, "that if they are
kept sight of for a whole day the deer is never seen, nor do they ever
catch any thing; and that the moment they get out of sight, there the
deer is found slain, nobody knows how. I took note of it, and I have
seen it this day verified. Pray, is this a fact, my liege?"

"I never before thought of it, or noted it," said the king; "but as far
as my memory serves me, I confess that it has uniformly been as you
say."

"Will your majesty suffer me to examine these two hounds?" said the old
man. "Methinks there is something very odd about them--Sure there was
never any animal on earth had eyes or feet such as they have."

The two beagles kept aloof, and pretended to be winding some game round
the top of the hill.

"They will not come now," said the king; "you shall see them by and by."

"If consistent with your majesty's pleasure," continued the aged knight,
"where--how--or when did you get these two hounds?"

"I got them in a most extraordinary way, to be sure!" replied the king,
in a thoughtful and hesitating mood.

"Your majesty does not then chuse to say how, or where, or from whom it
was that you had them?" said the old knight.

The king shook his head.

"I will only simply ask this," continued he; "and I hope there is no
offence.--Is it true that you got these hounds at the very same time
that the beautiful Elen, and Clara of Rosline, were carried off by the
fairies?"

The king started--fixed his eyes upon the ground--raised his hands, and
seemed gasping for breath. All the lords were momentarily in the same
posture; the query acted on them all like an electrical shock. The old
man seemed to enjoy mightily the effect produced by his insinuations--He
drew still nearer to the king.

"What is it that troubles your majesty?" said he. "What reflections have
my simple questions raised in your mind?--Your majesty, I am sure, can
have no unpleasant reflections on that score?"

"Would to the Virgin Mary that it were even so!" said the king.

"How is it possible," continued the officious old man, "that any thing
relating to two dogs can give your majesty trouble? Pray tell us all
about them--Who was it you got them from?"

"I do not know, and if I did----"

"Would you know him again if you saw him?"

The king looked at the old man, and held his peace.

"Did you buy them, or borrow them?" continued he.

"Neither!" was the answer.

"What then did you give in exchange for them?"

"Only a small token."

"And pray, if your majesty pleases, what might that token be?"

"Who dares to ask that?" said the king, with apparent trouble of mind.

"Would you know your pledge again if you saw it?" said the old man,
sarcastically.

"Who are you, sir?" said the king, proudly, "that dares to question your
sovereign in such a manner?"

"Who am I!" said the old man. "That is a good jest! That is such a
question to ask at one who has scarcely ever been from your side, since
you were first laid in your cradle!"

"I know the face," said the king, "but all this time I cannot remember
who you are.--My Lord of Hume, do you know who the reverend old
gentleman is?" And in saying this his majesty turned a little aside with
the earl.

"Do I know who he is?" said Hume. "Yes, by Saint Lawrence I do--I know
him as well as I do your majesty. Let me see--It is very singular that I
cannot recollect his name--I have seen the face a thousand times--Is he
not some abbot, or confessor, or----No--Curse me, but I believe he is
the devil!"

The earl said this in perfect jocularity, because he could not remember
the old man's name; but when he looked at the king, he perceived that
his eyes were fixed on him in astonishment. The earl's, as by sympathy,
likewise settled by degrees into as much seriousness as they were
masters of, and there the two stood for a considerable time, gazing at
one another, like two statues.

"I was only saying so in jest, my liege," said Hume; "I did not once
think that the old gentleman was the devil. Why are you thoughtful?"

"Because, now when I think of it, he hinted at some things which I am
certain no being on earth knew of, save myself, and another, who cannot
possibly divulge them."

They both turned slowly about at the same instant, curious to take
another look of this mysterious old man; but when fairly turned round
they did not see him.

"What has become of the old man," said the king, "that spoke to me just
now?"

"Here, sire!" said one.

"Here!" said another.

"Here!" said a third; all turning at the same time to the spot where
the old man and his horse stood, but neither of them were there.

"How is this?" said the king, "that you have let him go from among you
without noting it?"

"He must have melted into air, he and his horse both," said they; "else
he could not otherwise have left us without being observed."

The king blessed himself in the name of the Holy Virgin, and all the
chief saints in the calendar. The Earl of Hume swore by the greater part
of them, and cursed himself that he had not taken a better look at the
devil when he was so near him, as no one could tell if ever he would
have such a chance again. Douglas said he hoped there was little doubt
of that.




CHAPTER II.


The hunt was now over, and Gale's lambs were all scattered abroad; he
threw off his coat and tried to gather them, but he soon found that,
without the assistance of Trimmy, it was impossible; so he was obliged
to go home and endeavour to persuade her again out to the hill, by
telling her that Mooly and Scratch had both left it. Trimmy then came
joyfully, and performed in half an hour what her master could not have
effected before night.

When he had gotten them all collected, and settled at their food, he
went away in the evening to seek for his friend Croudy, to have some
amusement with him. He found him lying in a little hollow, conversing
with himself, and occasionally with Mumps, who paid very little
attention to what he said. He now and then testified his sense of the
honour intended to him, by giving two or three soft indolent strokes
with his tail upon the ground, but withall neither lifted his head nor
opened his eyes. Gale addressed his friend Croudy in a jocund and
rallying manner, who took no notice of it, but continued to converse
with Mumps.

"Ye're nae great gallaunt, after a' now, Mumps. Gin I had been you, man,
an' had seen sic twa fine beasts as Mooly an' Scratch come to our hills,
I wad hae run away to them, an' fiddled about them, an' smelt their
noses, an' kissed them, an' cockit up my tail on my rigging wi' the best
o' them; but instead o' that, to tak the pet an' rin away far outbye,
an' there sit turnin up your nose an' bow-wowing as ye war a
burial-boding!--hoo, man, it is very bairnly like o' ye! Humph! fools do
ay as they are bidden! Ye're nae fool, Mumps, for ye seldom do as ye're
bidden."

"Tell me, Croudy," said Gale, "does Mumps really run away in a panic
when he perceives the king's hounds?"

"_Panic when he perceives the king's hounds!_ Are ye gaun to keep on at
bletherin' English? Tell me, ye see--for if ye be, I'm gaun to clatter
nane to ye."

"Dear Croudy, I have often told you that there is not such a thing as
English and Scotch languages; the one is merely a modification of the
other, a refinement as it were"----

"Ay, an _exaltation_ like--ation! ation! I'm sure nae Scot that isna a
fool wad ever let that sound, _ation_, come out o' his mouth. Mumps,
what say ye tilt?"

"But, Croudy, I have news to tell you that will delight you very much;
only, ere I begin, tell me seriously, Does your dog really run off when
he sees or hears the king's two white hounds?"

"Really he does--Is that ony wonder? D'ye think Mumps sic a fool as no
to ken a witch by a brute beast?"

"What do you mean to insinuate, Croudy?"

"_Sinuate_--What's that?"

"I mean, What would you infer when you talk of witches? I have some
strange doubts about these dogs myself."

"Can you keep a secret?"

"Yes, if it is worth keeping."

"At ony rate, swear that if ever you do tell it, it is not to be in
English. Nane o' your _awlis's_ an' _ations_ in it. Gale, I hae the
maist wonderfu' story to tell ye that ever happened sin' Nimrod first
gaed out to the hunting wi' a bull-dog an' a pouch-fu' stanes. Ye see,
yesterday at morn, when the hunt began, I clamb up into the Eildon tree,
an' haid mysel' amang the very thickest o' its leaves, where I could see
every thing, but naething could see me. I saw the twa white hounds a'
the gate, but nae appearance of a deer; an' aye they came nearer an'
nearer to me, till at last I saw a bonny, braw, young lady, a' clad i'
white, about a hunder paces frae me, an' she was aye looking back an'
rinning as gin she wantit to be at the Eildon tree. When she saw the
hounds comin on hard behind her, she cried out; but they soon o'ertook
her, threw her down, an' tore her, an' worried her; an' I heard her
makin' a noise as gin she had been laughin' ae while an' singin'
another, an' O I thought her sang was sweet; it was something about the
fairies. Weel, this scene, sae contrair to a' nature, didna end here,
for I heard the tae dog sayin' to the tither, in plain language,--'Wha's
this has been the deer to-day?' An it answered again an' said, 'Lady
Marrion of Coomsley, ye may see by her goud rings; she is the
twenty-third, and our task will soon be dune.'

'Sister, read me my riddle,' said the first.

    'I ate my love an' I drank my love,
      An' my love she gae me light;
    An' the heart o' the deer may lie right near
      Where it lay yesternight.'

'Ha! that's nae riddle!' said the other; 'little does some wat what
they're to eat an' what they're to drink the night! Can ye tell me,
sister, if the wicked deed will be done?--Will the king die to-night?

    'The poison's distill'd, and the monk is won,
    And to-night I fear it will be done.
    Hush!--hush!--we are heard an' seen;
    Wae be to the ears, and wae be to the een!'

"An wi' that, they rowed themsels on the bonny corpse; and when I lookit
again, there was a fine, plump, bausined roe-deer lying, an' the blude
streamin' frae her side; an' down comes the king an' his men, an' took
her away hame to their supper."

"Now, Croudy, of all the tales I ever heard that is the most improbable
and unnatural! But it is too singular and out of the common course of
nature for you to have framed it; and besides, I never knew you to tell
a manifest lie--Are you certain that you did not dream it?"

"How could I dream on the top of a tree? Ye may either believe it or no
as ye like--it's a' true."

"I was sure there was something more than ordinary about these dogs; but
what to make of your story I know not. Saint Waldave be our shield! Do
you think the king and his nobles have been feasting upon changed human
creatures all this while? There is something in the whole business so
revolting to human nature, a man cannot think of it! It seems, too, that
there is a plot against the life of the king--What shall we do in
this?--The fairies have again been seen at the Eildon Tree, that is
certain; and it is said some more young people are missing."

"They'll soon hae us a' thegither--I like that way o' turnin' fock into
deers an' raes, and worrying them, warst ava--Mumps, lad, how wad ye
like to be turned into a deer, an' worried an' eaten?--Aigh, man! ye
_wad_ like it ill! I think I see how ye wad lay yoursel out for
fear--Ha, ha! I wad like to see ye get a bit hunt, man, if I thought ye
wad win away wi' the life--I wad like to see ye streek yoursel for
aince."

"I wonder, Croudy, after seeing such a sight as you have just now
described, that you can descend from that to speak such nonsense."

"Tongues maun wag--an' when they gang it's no for naething--It's a queer
thing speaking!--Mumps, ye can speak nane, man--It's no for want of a
tongue, I'm sure."

"Let us consider what's to be done--The king should be warned."

"I dinna see what's to hinder you to speak, Mumps, as weel as ony white
beagle i' the country."

"I have it--I will go home directly and tell pretty Pery--she will
apprize the abbot, and we shall have the two hounds, Mooly and Scratch,
burnt at the stake to-morrow."

"You tell Pery? No; that will never do; for you will speak English--That
tale winna tell in English; for the twa witches, or fairies, or changed
fock, or whatever they may be, didna speak that language themsels--sin'
the thing is to be tauld, I'll rather tell Pery mysel, if it is the same
thing to you."

This Pery was a young volatile maiden at Eildon Hall, who was over head
and ears in love with Gale. She would have given the whole world for
him; and in order to tease him somewhat, she had taken a whim of
pretending to be in love with Croudy. Croudy hated all the women, and
more particularly Pery, who had been the plague of his life; but of late
he had heard some exaggerated accounts of the kind sentiments of her
heart respecting him, which had wonderfully altered Croudy, although he
still kept up as well as he could the pretence of disliking the sex. He
went to Pery that evening as she was gathering in some clothes from the
bushes, and desired her, with a most important face, to meet him at the
Moss Thorn in half an hour, for he had something to tell her that would
surprise her.

"Indeed and that I will with all my heart, Croudy," said she; "how glad
I am that I have got you this length! I can guess what your secret will
be."

"Ye can do nae sic thing," said Croudy, "nor nae woman that ever was
born."

"I'll wager three kisses with you, Croudy, at the Old Moss Thorn, that I
do," returned she.

Croudy hung his head to one side, and chuckled, and crowed, and laid on
the ground with his staff; and always now and then cast a sly look-out
at the wick of his eye to Pery.

"It's a queer creature a woman," said Croudy--"very bonny creature
though!"

"Well, Croudy, I'll meet you at the Moss Thorn," said Pery, "and pay
you your wager too, provided you have either spirit to ask, or accept of
it when offered."

Croudy went away laughing till his eyes blinded with tears, and laying
on the ground with his stick.--"I watna what I'll do now," said he to
himself, "little impudent thing that she is!--She's eneugh to pit a body
mad!--Mumps--O, man, ye're an unfarrant beast!--Three kisses at the Moss
Thorn!--I wish I had this meeting by!--Mumps, I never saw sic an
unfeasible creature as you, man, when ane thinks about a bonny woman--A
woman!--What is a woman?--Let me see!--'Tis no easy to ken!--But I ken
this--that a ewe lamb is a far nicer, bonnier, sweeter, innocenter,
little creature than a toop lamb. Oh! I wish it war night, for I'm no
weel ava!--Mumps, ye're a perfect blockhead, man!"

Precisely while this was going on at Eildon-Hall, there were two ladies
met hurriedly on the Abbey Walk. No one knew who they were, or whence
they came, but they were lovely beyond expression, although their eyes
manifested a kind of wild instability. Their robes were white as snow,
and they had that light, elegant, sylph-like appearance, that when they
leaned forward to the evening air, one could hardly help suspecting that
they would skim away in it like twin doves.

"Sister," said the one, "haste and tell me what we are to do?"

"There is much to do to-night," said the other. "That clown who saw us,
and heard us speak, will blab the news; and then, think what the
consequences may be! He must be silenced, and that instantly."

"And tell me," said the first, "is the plot against the king's life to
be put in execution to-night?"

"I fear it is," answered the other; "and the abbot, his own kinsman, is
in it."

"Alas, sister, what shall we do! Give me Philamy's rod, and trust the
clown to me. But do you make all possible haste, and find your way into
the banquet hall, and be sure to remain there in spite of all
opposition."

The two sisters parted; and she that got the wand from the other
repaired straight to the Moss Thorn, where honest Croudy, and his dog
Mumps, were lying at a little distance from each other; the one very
busy biting for fleas, that he supposed had made a lodgment among his
rough matted hair, and the other conversing with himself about the
properties of women, fairies, and witches. All of a sudden he beheld
this beautiful angelic creature coming towards him, which made his heart
thrill within him.

"Saint Mary be my guide!" exclaimed Croudy to himself; "saw ever ony
body the like o' yon? I declare Pery has dressed hersel like a princess
to come an' speak to me!--An' to think o' me kissing a creature like
yon! I maun do it, too, or else I'll never hear the end o't.--Och! what
will I do!--I'll lie down an' pretend to be sleepin."

Croudy drew his plaid up over his face, stretched out his limbs, and
snored as in a profound sleep. The fair lady came up, gave him three
strokes with her wand, and uttered certain words at every stroke; and,
lo! the whole mortal frame of Croudy was in five seconds changed into
that of a huge bristly boar! The transformation was brought about so
suddenly, and Mumps was so much engaged, that he never once noticed, in
the slightest degree, till all was over, and the lady had withdrawn. Let
any man judge of the honest colley's astonishment, when, instead of his
master, he beheld the boar standing hanging his ears, and shaking his
head at him. He betook himself to immediate flight, and ran towards the
house faster than ever he ran in his life, yelping all the way for
perfect fright. Croudy was very little better himself. At first he
supposed that he was in a dream, and stood a long time considering of
it, in hopes the fantasy would go off; but on seeing the consternation
of Mumps, he looked first to the one side, and then to the other, and
perceiving his great bristly sides and limbs, he was seized with
indescribable terror, and fled at full speed. It is well known what a
ridiculous figure a hog makes at any time when frightened, and exerting
itself to escape from the supposed danger--there is not any thing so
calculated to make one laugh--his stupid apprehension of some
approaching mischief--the way that he fixes his head and listens--gives
a grunt like the crack of a musket, and breaks away again. Every one who
has witnessed such a scene, will acknowledge, that it is a masterpiece
of the ludicrous. Consider, then, what it would be to see one in such a
fright as this poor beast was, and trying to escape from himself;
running grunting over hill and dale, hanging out his tongue with
fatigue, and always carrying the object of his terror along with him. It
was an ineffectual exertion of mind to escape from matter; for, though
Croudy's form and nature were changed, he still retained the small and
crude particles of the reasoning principle which he had before. All
feelings else were, however, for the present swallowed up in utter
dismay, and he ran on without any definitive aim, farther than a kind of
propensity to run to the end of the world. He did not run a great way
for all that; for he lost his breath in a very short time; but even in
that short time, he run himself into a most imminent danger.

Squire Fisher of Dernaway Tower had a large herd of cows--they were all
standing in the loan, as the milking green is called in that country,
and the maidens were engaged in milking them, singing the while in full
chorus, (and a sweet and enlivening chorus it was, for the evening was
mild and serene), when down comes this unearthly boar into the loan, all
fatigued as he was, gaping and running on without stop or stay. The kine
soon perceived that there was something super-human about the creature,
for even the most dull of animals have much quicker perceptions than
mankind in these matters; and in one moment they broke all to the gate
as they had been mad, overturning the milk, maidens, and altogether. The
boar ran on; so did the kine, cocking their heads and roaring in terror,
as if every one of them had been bewitched, or possessed by some evil
spirit. It was a most dismal scene!--The girls went home with the rueful
tidings, that a mad boar had come into the loan, and bitten the whole
herd, which was all run off mad, along with the furious and dreadful
animal. The dogs were instantly closed in for fear of further danger to
the country; and all the men of the village armed themselves, and
sallied out to surround and destroy this outrageous monster.

It chanced, however, that the boar in his progress ran into a large
field of strong standing corn, which so impeded his course that he fell
down breathless, and quite exhausted; and thus he lay stretched at full
length, panting in a furrow, while all the men of the country were
running round and round him, every one with a sword, spear, or fork,
ready to run into his body.

Croudy, or the Boar, as it is now more proper to designate him, got here
some time to reflect. He found that he was transformed by witchcraft or
enchantment, and as he had never looked up from under his plaid during
the moments of his transformation, he conceived it to have been the
beautiful and wicked Pery that had wrought this woful change upon him;
therefore he had no hopes of regaining his former shape, save in her
returning pity and compassion; and he had strong hopes that she would
ere long relent, as he had never wilfully done her any ill. Pery knew
nothing about the matter; but actually went up with a heart as light as
a feather to have some sport with Croudy at the Old Thorn; and when she
found that he was not there, she laughed and went home again, saying to
herself, that she knew he durst not stand such an encounter.

The poor boar arose from his furrow in the midst of the field of corn,
as soon as it was day-light next morning, and with a heavy and forlorn
heart went away back to the Old Moss Thorn, in hopes that the cruel Pery
would seek him there, and undo the enchantment. When he came, he
discovered honest Mumps lying on the very spot where he had last seen
his master in his natural shape. He had sought it again over night,
notwithstanding the horrible fright that he had got, for he knew not
where else to find his master; and stupid as he was, yet, like all the
rest of his species, he lived only in his master's eye. He was somewhat
alarmed when he saw the boar coming slowly toward him, and began first
to look over the one shoulder, and then over the other, as if meditating
an escape; but, seeing that it came grunting in such a peaceable and
friendly manner, Mumps ventured to await the issue, and by the time the
monster approached within twenty paces of him, this faithful animal went
cowring away to meet him, prostrated himself at the boar's feet, and
showed every symptom of obedience and affection. The boar, in return,
patted him with his cloven hoof, and stroaked him with his bristly
cheek. Matters were soon made up--thenceforward they were inseparable.

The boar lay all that day about the Moss Thorn, and Mumps lay in his
bosom, but no pitying damsel, witch, or fairy, came near him. He grew
extremely hungry in the evening, and was deeply distressed what to do
for food, for he pitied Mumps more than himself. At length he tried to
plow up the earth with his nose, as he remembered of having seen swine
do before, but at that he made small progress, doing it very awkwardly,
and with great pain to his face. Moreover, for all his exertion, he
found nothing to eat, save one or two moss-corns, and a ground walnut,
with which he was obliged to content himself; and, for his canine
friend, there was nothing at all.

Next morning he saw his neighbour servants seeking for him, and calling
his name, but he could make them no answer, save by long and mournful
sounds between a grunt and groan. He drew near to several of them, but
they regarded him in no other light than as a boar belonging to some one
in the neighbourhood, straying in the fields. His case was most
deplorable; but as he still conceived there was one who knew his
situation well, he determined to seek her. He went down to Eildon-Hall,
with the faithful Mumps walking close by his side--tried to work his way
into the laundry, but being repulsed, he waited with patience about the
doors for an opportunity to present himself before Pery. She came out at
length, and went away singing to the well. The boar followed, uttering
the most melancholy sounds that ever issued from the chest of distressed
animal. Pery could not help noticing him a little. "What strange animal
can this be?" said she to herself; but perceiving that Mumps too was
following her, her attention was soon directed solely to him.

"Alas, poor Mumps," said she, "you are famishing. What can be become of
your master?"

The boar laid his ungraceful foot softly on that of Pery, looked
ruefully in her face, and uttered a most melancholly sound; as much as
to say, "You know well what is become of him! Have you no pity nor
remorse in your heart?"

It was impossible Pery could comprehend this. She judged, like others,
that the animal had strayed from home, and was complaining to her for
food. She looked at him, and thought him a very docile and valuable
swine, and one that would soon be ready for the knife. He was astonished
at her apparent indifference, as well as moved with grief and vengeance,
seeing the abject state to which she had reduced him; and in his heart
he cursed the whole sex, deeming them all imps of Satan, witches, and
enchantresses, each one. He followed her back to the house.

"Come in, Mumps," said she, "and you shall have your breakfast for the
sake of him you belonged to, whatever is become of him, poor fellow!"

The boar ran forward, and kneeled at her feet moaning, on which she
kicked him, and drove him away, saying, "What does the vile beast want
with me? Mumps, come you in and get some meat, honest brute."

Mumps would not come in, but when the boar was expelled, turned back
with him, looking very sullen. She brought him out a bicker of cold
parritch mixed with milk, but he would not taste them until the boar had
first taken his share; after which they went and lay down in the yard
together, the dog in the boar's bosom. Thus did they continue for many
days. At length the master of Eildon had the boar cried at the
church-door, and at the cross of Melrose, and as no one appeared to
claim him, he put him up for slaughter.




CHAPTER III.


But to return from this necessary digression.--The king and his nobles
had a banquet in the Abbey that night on which Croudy was changed, and
it was agreed by all present, that the venison of the roe-deer of Eildon
exceeded in quality that of any other part of the kingdom. The king
appeared thoughtful and absent during the whole of the evening; and at
mass, it was observed that he was more fervent in his devotions than
ever he was wont to be. The words of the old mysterious stranger--his
sudden disappearance--the rumours of fairies and witchcrafts that were
abroad, together with another vision which he had seen, but not yet
disclosed, preyed upon his mind, as it was little wonder they should,
and made him apprehend that every step he took was on enchanted ground.
The hound, Mooly, had slipt into the banquet-hall at the time of
vespers, and neither soothing, threatening, nor the lash, would drive
her hence. She clung to the king's foot until he took pity on her, and
said, "Cease, and let the poor animal stay, since she insists on it. I
will not have her maltreated for the fault of those who have the charge
of her, and should have put her better up." So Mooly got leave to
remain, and kept her station the whole night without moving.

The glass circulated until a late hour. At length the king said, "My
lords, I crave a cup full to the brim, which I mean to dedicate to the
health of a lady, whom I think I saw yesterday morning; the mentioning
of whose name will a little astonish you."

"My royal son and sire," said the abbot, "for your majesty is both, in
the general acceptation of the terms, shall it not be of your far-famed
Malmsey that you will drink this beloved toast?"

"If you so please," said his majesty.

"Ralpho," said the abbot, "here is the key. You alone know where the
portion of old Malmsey is to be found among his majesty's stores here
deposited; bring one bottle only to his majesty, and pour it carefully
yourself."

Ralpho obeyed; poured out the wine till the cup was full, and turned the
remainder into a sewer. The king then arose, and lifting his cup on
high--"My lords," said he, "I give you the fairest, the loveliest, and
the most angelic maid that ever Scotland bred--I give you Elen of
Rosline."

Every one started at the name till the wine was spilled all around the
table. Astonishment was in every look, for the king had said he had seen
her yesterday at morn.

"To the bottom," cried the king.

Every one drank off his cup with avidity, anxious to hear the
explanation. The king kept the position in which he stood until he saw
every cup drained, and then brought his slowly and gracefully to his
lips, with the intention of emptying it at one draught. But the moment
that it reached them, Mooly sprung up, snatched the cup and wine out of
his hand, and threw them on the floor.

"Strike the animal dead," cried one.

"Kick her out of the hall," said another.

"Take her out and let her be hung up," cried a third.

Mooly cowered at her royal master's feet, as if begging pardon, or
begging to remain.

"Let her alone," said the king; "let us see what the beast means, and if
she persists in the outrage."

He filled his cup of the wine before him, and brought it slowly to his
head in the same manner as he did before. He even took it away and
brought it back several times, in order to see if she would be provoked
to do the like again. But no!--Mooly appeared perfectly satisfied, and
suffered her master to drink it off piece-meal. A certain consternation
reigned in the royal apartment for some time; sharp arguments followed;
and, in the mean time, Angus and the abbot were heard whispering apart,
and the one said, "It must be accomplished this night, or abandoned for
ever."

The nobles again took their seats, and the king appeared as formerly to
be growing thoughtful and dejected.

"Pray cheer up your heart and be merry, my liege," said Douglas, "and
let not the casual frolic of a pampered animal tend to cast down your
majesty's spirits. Your majesty has not yet drank the extraordinary
toast you proposed."

"But that I shall do presently," said the king.

"Ay," said the abbot, "and your majesty shall do it too in the wine of
which I have heard your majesty so much approve. Fetch another bottle,
Ralpho."

Ralpho brought it.--"I will pour for myself," said the king; and taking
the bottle, he poured about one-half of it into his cup; again named the
name of Elen of Rosline with rapturous enthusiasm, and again as he put
the cup to his lips, Mooly sprung up, snatched the cup from his hand,
and dashed it on the floor more furiously than before, and then cowered
at her master's feet as if begging not to be struck.

"There is something more than ordinary in this," said the king, "and I
will have it investigated instantly."

"There is nothing in it at all," said the abbot. "Pardon me, sire; but
it is a fault in your majesty, for which I have grieved, and often done
penance myself. You are, and have always been a visionary, and nothing
will ever wean you from it. You make idols of these two animals; they
have sometime been taught a number of pranks, and for one of these would
you augur aught against the monastery, your nobles, or your majesty's
own peace of mind?"

"Are you certain that is the genuine Old Malmsey wine, Ralpho?" said the
king.

"I am certain, sire, it is the wine that was shown to me as such."

The king poured out the remainder that was in the bottle. "Drink thou
that, Ralpho," said he, "and tell me if it be really and truly the
genuine Malmsey."

Ralpho thanked his majesty, bowed, and drank off the cup without
hesitation.

"Is it genuine, Ralpho?"

"I don't know, your majesty; I think it tastes a little of the earth."

The circle laughed at Ralpho's remark; and the conversation began again
to grow general, when, some time thereafter, Ralpho, who was bustling
about, sat down in a languid and sickly posture on one of the window
seats. They looked at him, and saw that his face was becoming black.

"What is the matter, Ralpho?" said one.

"I do not know what is the matter with me," returned he; "I think I feel
as if that wine were not like to agree with my stomach."

He fell into immediate convulsions, and in ten minutes he was lying a
swollen and disfigured corpse.

Douglas was the first to cry out _treason_. He bolted the door, and
stood inside with his sword drawn, vowing that he would search the soul
of every traitor in the room. Angus's great power made the other lords
to stand in awe of him; although it was obvious to them all, that he was
at least as likely to have a hand in this as any other. Hume charged him
boldly to his face with it, and made proffer to abide by the proof; but
he pretended to receive the charge only with scorn and derision, as one
which no reasonable man could suppose. The king was greatly affected,
and, upon the whole, showed rather more apprehension on account of his
personal safety, than was, perhaps, becoming in a sovereign. He cried
out that "they were all of them traitors! and that he would rather be at
the head of a band of moss-troopers, than be thus condemned to have such
a set about him whom he could not trust."

After some expostulation he acquitted the Earl of Angus, more, it was
thought, through fear, than conviction of his innocence; but from an
inference, the most natural in the world, he fixed the blame on the
abbot.

"My liege," said the reverend father, "I know no more how this has
happened than the child that is unborn. There can be no doubt but that,
instigated by some of your majesty's enemies, the wretch, Ralpho, has
mixed the poison himself, and has met with the fate he justly deserved."

"No!" replied the king, "If that had been the case, he would not have
been so ready in participating of the draught. I will not believe, but
that there is a combination among you to take my life."

Every one protested his innocence more strenuously than another.

The abbot was seized; and said, in his justification, "That he would
show his majesty the set of wine from which he had ordered Ralpho to
bring it, and he was willing to drink a share of any bottle of it that
they chose;" which he did.

But this did not convince the king. He sent off privately a messenger to
assemble the Border Chiefs, and bring them to his rescue--took his two
favourite hounds with him into his chamber, placed a strong guard,
counted his beads, and retired to rest.

Every means were tried next day by the nobles to dispel his majesty's
fears, and regain his confidence; and as nothing decisive could be
produced against any one, they succeeded in some degree. New
perplexities, however, continued to way-lay him, for he was throughout
his whole life the prey of witches and evil spirits; and though he
wrecked due vengeance on many, they still continued to harass him the
more.

After high mass he had retired to his chamber to meditate, when the
nobleman in waiting came in, and said, that a stranger wanted to speak
with him on some urgent business. He was introduced, and any one may
judge of the king's astonishment, when he saw that it was the identical
old man who had spoken to him on the mountain, and vanished, the day
before. The king's lip grew pale, and quivered as the stranger made his
obeisance.

"Thou herald of danger, treason, and confusion, what seekest thou again
with me?" said the king.

"I come, my liege," said he, "to seek redress for the injured, and
justice on the offenders. Your two favourite hounds came last night to
the houses of two widows in Newstead, and have carried off their two
children from their bosoms, which they have doubtlessly devoured, as no
traces of them can be found."

"Thou art a liar!" said the king, "and an inventor of lies, if not the
father of them; for these two dogs were locked up with me in my chamber
last night, and a guard placed on the door, so that what you aver is
impossible."

"I declare to your majesty," said the stranger, "by the truth of that
right hand, that I myself saw the two hounds at liberty this morning at
daylight. I saw them come along the Monk's Meadow, carrying something
across on their necks."

"It is easy to prove the falsehood of all that thou hast said," replied
the king; "and thy malicious intent shall not go unpunished."

He then called in the guards, and bade them declare before that
audacious stranger, if his two white hounds, Mooly and Scratch, were not
in his chamber all the night. The guards were mute, and looked one to
another.

"Why are you ashamed to declare the truth?" said the king to them. "Say,
were the two hounds in my chamber all night, or were they not?"

The men answered, "that the hounds were certainly out. How it came they
knew not, but that they were let in in the morning."

"There is a conspiracy among you again," said the king; "if not to
deprive your king of life, to deprive that life of every kind of quiet
and social comfort."

"I demand justice," said the stranger, "in the names of two weeping and
distracted mothers! In the name of all that is right, and held dear
among men! I demand that these two obnoxious and devouring animals be
hung upon a tree, or burnt alive before the sun go down. Then shall the
men of Scotland see that their sovereign respects their feelings and
privileges, even though they run counter to his own pleasures."

"One of these dogs saved my life last night," said the king; "and it is
very hard indeed that I should be compelled to do this. I will have
better testimony; and if I find that these children have actually been
devoured, (as most unlikely it is,) the depredators shall be punished."

The old man bowed, and was preparing to reply, when the knight in
waiting entered hastily, and told the king that there was a woman in the
outer court, crying bitterly for justice, and who was very urgent to
speak with him. The king ordered that she should be admitted, and in a
moment she stood before him, pale, shrivelled, hagard, and wild, and
altogether such a figure as one scarcely can see, or could see, without
the impression that she was scarce earthly. Her appearance was that of a
lady of quality, of great age; she had large ear-rings, a tremendous
ruff, a head-dress of a thousand intricate flutings, projecting before
and tapering upward behind, cork-heeled shoes, a low hoop, and a waist
of length and stiffness, not to be described.

"Revenge! Revenge! my lord, O king!" cried she. "I crave justice of your
majesty--justice, and nothing more. You have two hounds, that came into
my house early this morning, and have devoured, or taken away my only
daughter, my sole stay and hope in this world, and nothing is left but a
part of her garments. These dogs have some power deputed to them that is
not of thy giving, therefore grant me that I may see vengeance done upon
them, and their bodies burnt at a stake before the going down of the
sun."

"That is a true and worthy gentlewoman, my liege," said the old
stranger; "and you may take her word for whatever she advances."

The ancient dame turned about--stared on the stranger with wild
astonishment--dropped a low courtesy, and then said, "I crave you
pardon, my lord and master. I noted not that you were so nigh. I hope
your errand here coincides with mine."

"It does," said he; "there are more sufferers than one; and, by the head
that bows to thee!--I swear by none greater--we shall have justice if it
be in the land!"

"This is a combination," said the king; "I pay no regard to it. Bring
witnesses to establish your charges, and you shall have justice done."

They went forth to bring their proof, and behold they had them all in
the outer court. In the mean time the king sent for some men of the
place to come, and made enquiry of them who the old dame was, and what
was the character that she bore. They informed him that she was a noted
witch, and kept the whole country in terror and turmoil, and that she
had indeed an only daughter, who was an impious and malevolent minx,
devoted to every species of wickedness.

"The wrinkled beldame shall be burnt at the stake," said the king. "It
is proper that the land should be cleansed of these disturbers of its
peace; as for that old stranger, I have my own surmises concerning him,
and we shall find a way to deal with his subtilty."

He then sent for a reverend old friar of the name of Rubely, who was
well versed in all the minutiæ of diablery and exorcism, whose skill had
often been beneficial to the king in the trying and intricate parts of
his duty that related to these matters, and with him he conferred on
this important subject. Father Rubely desired the king to defer the
further examination of these people for a very little while; and, in the
mean time, he brought in a basin of holy water, consecrated seven times,
and set apart for sacred uses, after which the examination went on, and
a curious one it was. The old witch lady deposed, "That as she was lying
pondering on her bed, and wide awake, about the dawn of the morning, she
heard a curious and uncommon noise somewhere about the house: That,
rising, she went out silently to discover what it could be, and to her
utter astonishment, beheld the king's two hounds, Mooly and Scratch,
spring from her daughter's casement, and in a short space a beautiful
roe-deer followed them and bounded away to the Eildons: That she hasted
to her daughter's apartment, and found that her darling was gone." The
stories of the other two were exactly similar to one another, only that
the one blamed one hound, and the other the other. It was as follows: "I
was lying awake in the morning very early, with my son in my arms, when
one of the king's hounds came into my house. I saw it, and wist not how
it had got there. A short time after I heard it making a strange
scraping and noise in the other end of the house, on which I arose to
turn it out; but on going to the place from whence the sound seemed to
come, I found nothing. I searched all the house, and called the hound by
her name, but still could find nothing; and at last I lighted a candle
and sought all the house over again, without being able to discover any
traces of her. I went back to return to my bed, wondering greatly what
had become of the animal; but having opened the door before to let her
make her escape, I conceived that she had stolen off without my having
perceived it. At that very instant, however, I beheld her coming softly
out of the bed where I had left my child, and in a moment she was out at
the door and away. I ran to the bed with the light in my hand, but my
dear child was gone, and no part, not even a palm of his hand,
remaining!"

_Ques._ "Was there any blood in the bed, or any symptoms of the child
having been devoured?"

_A._ "No; I could discover none."

_Q._ "Did the hound appear to have any thing carrying in her mouth, or
otherwise, when she escaped from the house?"

_A._ "No; I did not notice that she had any thing."

_Q._ "Was there any thing else in the house at the time; any other
appearance that you could not account for?"

_A._ "Yes; there was something like a leveret followed her out at the
door, but I paid no regard to it."

_Q._ "Was the child baptized in a Christian church?" (No answer.)

_Q._ "Were you yourself ever baptized in a Christian church?" (No
answer.)

_Q._ "Why do you not answer to these things?"

_A._ "Because I see no connection that they have with the matter in
question."

"None in the least," said the old stranger, who still kept by their
side.

When the king heard that the answers of the two women were so exactly
similar, though the one was examined before the other was brought in, he
said,--"This is some infernal combination; they are all of them witches,
and their friend there is some warlock or wizard; and they shall all be
burnt at the stake together before the going down of the sun."

"It is a judgment worthy of such a monarch," said the stranger.

"Father Rubely," said the king, "you who know all the men in this part
of my dominions, Do you know any thing of this old man, who refuseth to
give account of himself?"

"I have often seen the face," said Rubely; "but I cannot tell at present
from whence he is.--Pray, sir, are you not he who has supplied the
monastery with cattle for these many moons?"

"I am the same," said the stranger; "And were they not the best that
ever were furnished to the Abbey?"

"They were," said Rubely.

"Were they not exquisite and delicious above all food ever before
tasted?" said the old man.

"They were indeed," said Rubely; "and I think I have heard it reported
that no one ever knew from whence you brought these cattle."

"I knew myself," said the stranger, "and that was sufficient for me."

"I have heard of this before," said the king, "and I think I divine
something of the matter. Tell me, I insist on it, from whence you
brought these cattle?"

"I brought them from among the poor and the indigent," said the old man,
"on whom kings and priests for ever feed. For Christian carrion, I
provide food from among themselves."

"They shall all be worried and burnt at the stake," said the king; "and
this man's torments shall be doubled."

"Have patience, my lord, O king," said Rubely, "and let us not destroy
the reclaimable with those of whom there is no hope." Then going near to
the first woman who had lost her son, he said to her,--"It is better to
do well late than never--are you content to be baptized even now?"

The woman bowed consent. He put the same question to the other, who
bowed likewise. The old man stood close by their side, and appeared to
be in great trouble and wrath. Rubely brought his goblet of consecrated
water, and, as he past, he threw a portion of it on the wrinkled face of
the old man, pronouncing, at the same time, the sacred words of baptism.
The whole form and visage of the creature was changed in a moment to
that of a furious fiend: He uttered a yell that made all the Abbey shake
to its foundations, and forthwith darted away into the air, wrapt in
flame; and, as he ascended, he heaved his right hand, and shook his
fiery locks at his inquisitors. The old withered beldame yelped forth
hysteric gigglings, something between laughing and shrieks--the king
fell on his knees, clasped the rood and kissed it--the two women
trembled--and even old Rubely counted his beads, and stood for a short
space in mute astonishment. He next proposed trying the same experiment
with the old witch lady, but she resisted it so furiously, with cursing
and blasphemy, that they abandoned her to her fate, and had her burnt
at St Miles's Cross before the going down of the sun. It was said by
some that the old stranger appeared among the crowd to witness her
latter end; and that she stretched out her hands towards him, with loud
supplications, but he only flouted and mocked at her, and seemed to
enjoy the sport with great zest. When Father Rubely heard of this, he
said that it would happen so to every one who sold themselves to be
slaves of sin in the hour of their extremity.

The other two women confessed their sins, and received absolution. They
acknowledged that they had been acquainted with the stranger for a long
season; that he had often pressed them to sign and seal, which they had
always declined, but that nevertheless he had such an influence over
them, that he in a manner led them as he pleased; that at first they
took him for a venerable apostle, but at length discovered that he was a
powerful sorcerer, and could turn people into the shapes of such beasts
as he pleased, but that they never knew he was the devil till then.

Friar Rubely assured them, that it was only such as slighted
church-ordinances over whom he was permitted to exert that power, and in
this the king passionately acquiesced. They confessed farther, that they
were still greatly afraid of him, for that he could turn himself into
any shape or form that he pleased; that he had often tempted them in the
form of a beautiful young man; and there was nothing more common with
him than to tempt men in the form of a lovely and bewitching woman, by
which means he had of late got many of them into his clutches. When the
king heard that, he counted his beads with redoubled fervency, and again
kissed the rood, for it reminded him of a lovely vision he had seen of
late, as well as some things of a former day. The women added, that the
stranger had of late complained grievously of two mongrel spirits, who
had opposed and counteracted him in every movement; and that they had
done it so effectually, that, for every weak Christian that he had
overcome and devoured, they had found means to destroy one of his
servants, or emissaries, so that his power in the land remained much
upon a par as in former times, although his means and exertions had both
been increased sevenfold.[1]

A consultation of holy men was next called, and measures adopted for the
recovery of the two children. There it was resolved, that prayers should
be offered up for them in seven times seven holy chapels and cells at
the same instant of time, and the like number of masses said, with all
due solemnity; and that then it would be out of the power of all the
spirits of the infernal regions--all of them that were permitted to
roam the earth, or any of their agents, to detain the children longer,
into whatever shape or form they might change them. But for these
solemnities some delay was necessary.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 1: From several parts of this traditionary tale it would
appear, that it is a floating fragment of some ancient allegorical
romance, the drift of which it is not easy to comprehend.]




CHAPTER IV.


Great was the consumpt of victuals at the Abbey during the stay of the
royal visitor!--the parsimonious brethren were confounded, and judged
that the country would to a certainty be eaten up, and a dearth of all
the necessaries of life ensue on the Border. When they beheld the
immense droves of bullocks--the loads of wild hogs and fallow-deer that
arrived daily from the royal forests of Ettrick and the mountains of the
Lowes, together with the flocks of fat black-headed wedders,--they
pressed their hands upon their lank sides, looked at their spare forms,
and at one another; but not daring to make any verbal remarks, they only
shaked their heads, and looked up to heaven!

Victuals were again wearing short. Gudgel, the fat caterer for that
immense establishment, was out riding from morn till even in search of
fat things; he delighted in the very sight of a well-fed sleek animal;
it was health to his stomach, and marrow to his bones. It was observed,
that, whenever he came in sight of one, he stroaked down his immense
protuberance of paunch with both hands, and smacked his lips. He had
been out the whole day, and was very hungry; and when hungry, he enjoyed
the sight of a fat animal most. Gudgel certainly fed by the eye as well
as the mouth; for it was noted, that when he was very hungry, he would
have given the yeomen any price for a well-fed beast.

He had been out the whole day--had procured but little stuff, and that
not of the first metal--but, on his way home, he heard of a fine
well-fed boar at Eildon-Hall; so he rode off the road, and alighted to
take a look of him. In a little triangular inclosure, at one corner of
the yard, there he beheld the notable boar lying at his ease, with
Mumps in his bosom. Of the dog he took no notice, but the sight of the
boar exhilarated him; he drew in a great mouthful of breath, closed his
lips, puffed out his cheeks, and made his two hands descend with a
semi-circular sweep slowly down over the buttons of his doublet. It is
impossible to tell how much the sight of such a carcase delighted
Gudgel!--Immoderately fat himself, his eye feasted on every thing that
was so; he could not even pass by a corpulent man, nor a pampered
overgrown matron, without fixing a keen glance upon them, as if
calculating exactly, or to a nearness, how much they would weigh,
sinking offal.

"Oh, gracious heaven! what a fine hog! Goodman Fletcher, could you think
of putting such a delicious morsel as that by your masters? For shame,
goodman, not to let me know before this time of such a prize as
this!--The very thing!--No words: the hog is mine. Name your
price--Good security, Goodman Fletcher--a king and a priest--I am so
glad I have found him--I'll have him slaughtered, and cut neatly up, as
I shall direct, before I leave the house."

A piece of sad news this for the poor boar! (Croudy the shepherd, that
once was.) When Gudgel pronounced the last sentence, the animal sprung
to his feet, gave a great snuff, and grunted out a moan that would have
pierced any heart but Gudgel's. "St Elijah!" said he, "what a fine
animal!" and gave him a lash with his whip as he rose. Mumps snarled,
and tried to bite the voluptuary in return for the unprovoked attack on
his master.

Precisely about the same time that Gudgel alighted at Eildon-Hall, the
two lovely and mysterious sisters met at their accustomed place in the
Abbey Walk, for it chanced to be the few minutes of their appearance in
mortal frame. Their eyes had still the wild unearthly dash of sublimity
in them; and human eye could not scan to which state of existence they
pertained, but their miens were more beautiful and serene than when they
last met.

"I give you joy, dear sister," said the one, "of our happy release! Our
adversary is baffled and driven from his usurped habitation--Our woeful
work of annihilation will henceforth cease, for the evil principle shall
not, as we dreaded, prevail in this little world of man, in which we
have received for a time a willing charge. Say what more is to be done
before we leave these green hills and the Eildon Tree."

"Much is yet to be done, my beloved Ellen," answered the other. "As I
was this day traversing the air in the form of a wild swan, I saw the
Borderers coming down in full array; with a Chieftain of most undaunted
might at their head. We must find means to warn the haughty Douglas,
else they will cut his whole retinue to pieces; and the protector of the
faithful must not fall into the hands of such men as these."

"He hath preyed on the vitals of his subjects," said she that spoke
first; and as she spoke she fixed her eyes on the ground in a thoughtful
attitude.

"It is meet he should," said the other--"And think ye he will not meet
with his guerdon better where he is than among these freemen of the
Border? Think not so seriously of this matter, for it will not abide a
thought--from the spider to the king, all live upon one another!--What
numbers one overgrown reptile must devour, to keep the balance of nature
in equipoise!"

The two lovely sisters, as she spoke this, held each other by the hand;
their angelic forms were bent gently forward, and their faces toward the
ground; but as they lifted these with a soft movement towards heaven, a
tear was glistening in each eye. Whether these had their source from the
fountain of human feelings, or from one more sublimed and pure, no man
to this day can determine.

"And then what is to become of the two little changelings?" said the
last speaker. "All the spells of priests and friars will avail nought
without our aid.--And the wild roe-deer? And the boar of Eildon? He, I
suppose, may take his fate--he is not worthy our care farther.--A
selfish grovelling thing, that had much more of the brute than the man
(as he should be) at first--without one principle of the heart that is
worthy of preservation."

"You are ever inclined to be severe," said the other. "If you but saw
the guise in which he is lying with his faithful dog, I think your heart
would be moved to pity."

"If I thought there was one spark of the heavenly principle of gratitude
in his heart, even to his dog," said she, "I would again renovate his
frame to that image which he degraded; but I do not believe it.--Mere
selfishness, because he cannot live without his dog."

"Here is Philany's rod," answered the other, "go, and reconnoitre for
yourself, and as you feel so act."

She took the golden wand, and went away toward Eildon Hall; but her
motion over the fields was like a thing sailing on the wind. The other
glided away into the beechen grove, for there were voices heard
approaching.

"Let us proceed to business, Goodman Fletcher," said Gudgel. "I insist
on seeing that fine animal properly slaughtered, blooded, and cut up,
before I go away. I have a man who will do it in the nicest style you
ever beheld." The boar looked pitifully to Gudgel, and moaned so loud
that Mumps fell a howling. "And I'll tell you what we'll do," continued
Gudgel; "we'll have his kidneys roasted on a brander laid on the coals,
and a stake cut from the inside of the shoulder.--How delicious they
will be!--Pooh! I wish they were ready just now--But we'll not be
long--And we'll have a bottle of your March beer to accompany
them.--Eh? Your charge may well afford that, goodman--Eh?"

The boar made a most determined resistance; and it was not till
after he was quite spent, and more hands had been procured, that
he was dragged at last forcibly to the slaughter-house, and laid upon
the killing-stool, with ropes tied round his legs; these they were
afraid were scarcely strong enough, and at the request of the butcher,
Pery lent her garters to strengthen the tie. Never was there a poor
beast in such circumstances! He screamed so incessantly that he even
made matters worse. His very heart was like to break when he saw Pery
lend her garters to assist in binding him. Mumps was very sorry too; he
whined and whimpered, and kissed his braying friend.

The noise became so rending to the ears, that all who were present
retired for a little, until the monster should be silenced. The butcher
came up with his bleeding-knife, in shape like an Andro Ferrara, and
fully half as long--felt for the boar's jugular vein, and then tried the
edge and point of his knife against his nail--"He has a hide like the
soal of a shoe," said the butcher; "I must take care and sort him
neatly." And so saying he went round the corner of the house to give his
knife a whet on the grinding-stone.

At that very instant the beautiful angelic nymph with the golden rod
came into the court-yard at Eildon-Hall, and hearing the outrageous
cries in the slaughter-house, she looked in as she was passing, that
being the outermost house in the square. There she beheld the woful
plight of the poor boar, and could not help smiling; but when she saw
honest Mumps standing wagging his tail, with his cheek pressed to that
of the struggling panting victim, and always now and then gently kissing
him, her heart was melted with pity. The dog cast the most beseeching
look at her as she approached, which when she saw her resolution was
fixed. She gave the monster three strokes with her wand, at each of
which he uttered a loud squeak; but when these were done, and some
mystic words of powerful charm uttered, in half a quarter of a minute
there lay--no bristly boar--but the identical Croudy the shepherd! in
the same garb as when transformed at the Moss Thorn; only that his hands
and feet were bound with straw ropes, strengthened and secured by the
cruel Pery's red garters.

"Bless me an' my horn!" said Croudy, as he raised up his head from the
spokes of the killing-stool; "I believe I'm turned mysel again!--I wad
like to ken wha the bonny queen is that has done this; but I'm sair
mistaen gin I didna see the queen o' the fairies jink by the corner. I
wonder gin the bloody hash will persist in killing me now. I'm fear'd
Gudgel winna can pit aff wantin' his pork steaks. May Saint Abednego be
my shield, gin I didna think I fand my ears birstling on a brander!"

The butcher came back, singing to himself the following verse, to the
tune of _Tibby Fowler_, which augured not well for Croudy.

    "Beef stakes and bacon hams
    I can eat as lang's I'm able;
    Cutlets, chops, or mutton pies,
    Pork's the king of a' the table."

As he sung this he was still examining the edge of his knife, so that he
came close to his intended victim, without once observing the change
that had taken place.

"Gude e'en t'ye, neighbour," said Croudy.

The butcher made an involuntary convulsive spring, as if a thunder-bolt
had struck him and knocked him away about six yards at one stroke. There
he stood and stared at what he now saw lying bound with the ropes and
garters, and the dog still standing by. The knife fell out of his
hand--his jaws fell down on his breast, and his eyes rolled in their
sockets.--"L----d G----d!" cried the butcher, as loud as he could roar,
and ran through the yard, never letting one bellow abide another.

The servants met him, asking what was the matter--"Was he cut? Had he
sticked or wounded himself?"

He regarded none of their questions; but dashing them aside, ran on,
uttering the same passionate ejaculation with all the power that the
extreme of horror could give to such a voice. Gudgel beheld him from a
window, and meeting him in the entry to the house, he knocked him down.
"I'll make you stop, you scoundrel," said he, "and tell me what all this
affray means."

"O L----d, sir! the boar--the boar!" exclaimed the butcher as he raised
himself with one arm from the ground, and defended his head with the
other.

"The boar, you blockhead!" said Gudgel,--"what of the boar? Is he not
like to turn well out?"

"He turns out to be the devil, sir--gang an' see, gang an see," said the
butcher.

Gudgel gave him another rap with his stick, swearing that they would not
get their brandered kidneys, and pork steak from the inside of the
shoulder, in any reasonable time, by the madness and absurdity of that
fellow, and waddled away to the slaughter-house as fast as his posts of
legs could carry him. When he came there, and found a booby of a clown
lying bound on the killing-stool, instead of his highly esteemed hog, he
was utterly confounded, and wist not what to say, or how to express
himself. He was in a monstrous rage, but he knew not on whom to vend it,
his greasy wits being so completely bemired, that they were incapable of
moving, turning, or comprehending any thing farther than a grievous
sensation of a want not likely to be supplied by the delicious roasted
kidneys, and pork steak from the inside of the shoulder. He turned twice
round, puffing and gasping for breath, and always apparently looking for
something he supposed he had lost, but as yet never uttering a distinct
word.

The rest of the people were soon all around him--the Goodman, Pery,
Gale, and the whole household of Eildon-Hall were there, all standing
gaping with dismay, and only detained from precipitate flight
by the presence of one another. The defrauded Gudgel first found
expression--"Where is my hog, you scoundrel?" cried he, in a tone of
rage and despair.

"Ye see a' that's to the fore o' him," said Croudy.

"I say, where is my hog, you abominable caitiff?--You miserable
wretch!--you ugly whelp of a beast!--tell me what you have made of my
precious hog?"

"Me made o' him!" said Croudy, "I made naething o' him; but some ane, ye
see, has made a man o' him--It was nae swine, but me.--I tell ye, that
ye see here a' that's to the fore o' him."

"Oh! oh!" groaned Gudgel, and he stroaked down his immense flanks three
or four times, every one time harder than the last. "Pooh! so then I am
cheated, and betrayed, and deceived; and I shall have nothing to
eat!--nothing to eat!--nothing to eat!--Goodman Fletcher, you shall
answer for this;--and you, friend beast, or swine, or warlock, or
whatever you may be, shall not 'scape for nought;" and, so saying, he
began to belabour Croudy with his staff, who cried out lustily; and it
was remarked somewhat in the same style and tenor, too, as he exhibited
lately in a different capacity.

The rest of the people restrained the disappointed glutton from putting
an end to the poor clown; and notwithstanding that appearances were
strangely against him, yet, so well were they accustomed to Croudy's
innocent and stupid face, that they loosed him with trembling hands,
Pery being as active in the work as any, untying her red garters. "I
know the very knots," said she,--"No one can tie them but myself."

"By the Rood, my woman! gin I war but up, I'll _knot_ you weel eneuch,"
said Croudy; and if he had not been withheld by main force, he would
have torn out her hair and her eyes. He, however, accused her of being a
witch, and took witnesses on it; and said, he would make oath that she
had changed him into a boar on such an evening at the Moss Thorn.

Pery only laughed at the accusation, but all the rest saw it in a
different light. They all saw plainly that Croudy had been metamorphosed
for a time by some power of witchcraft or enchantment--they remembered
how Mumps had still continued to recognise and acknowledge him in that
degraded state; and hearing, as they did, his bold and intrepid accusal
of Pery, they all judged that it would stand very hard with her.

When Gudgel had heard all this, he seized the first opportunity of
taking Pery aside, and proposed to her, for the sake of her own
preservation, instantly to change the clown again; "And, as it is all
one to you," said he, "suppose you make him a little fatter--if you do
so, I shall keep your secret--if you do not, you may stand by the
consequences."

Pery bade him, "Look to himself,--keep the secret, or not keep it, as he
chose;--there were some others, who should be nameless, that were as
well worth changing as Croudy."

Gudgel's peril appeared to him now so obvious, and the consequences so
horrible, that his whole frame became paralysed from head to foot. In
proportion with his delight in killing and eating the fat things of the
earth, did his mind revolt at being killed and eaten himself; and when
he thought of what he had just witnessed, he little wist how soon it
might be his fate. He rode away from Eildon-Hall a great deal more
hungry and more miserable than he came. The tale, however, soon spread,
with many aggravations; and the ill-starred Pery was taken up for a
witch, examined, and committed to prison in order to stand her trial;
and in the mean time the evidences against her were collected.




CHAPTER V.

The Keylan Rowe.

    An' round, an' round, an' seven times round,
      An' round about the Eildon tree!
    For there the ground is fairy ground,
      And the dark green ring is on the lea.

    The prayers were pray'd, and the masses said,
      And the waning Moon was rising slow;
    And ane dame sits at the Eildon-tree,
      Whose cheike is pale as April snow.

    Ane cross is claspit in her hand,
      Ane other lyis on her breiste bone;
    And the glaize of feire is on her ee,
      As she looks to the Eildon-stone.

    And aye she sung her holy hymn;
      It was made to charm the elfin band,
    And lure the little wilderit things,
      Whose dwelling is in Fairy-land.

    And first she heard the horses' tread,
      Like drifting leaves come through the dell;
    And then she heard their bridles ring,
      Like rain drops tinkling on a bell.

    Then the wild huntsmen first came on,
      An' sic ane band was never seen!
    Some wanted cheike, some wanted chin,
      And some had nouthir nose nor een;

    One had ane ee in his forehead,
      That ee was like ane glaizit pole;
    His breiste was like ane heck of hay;
      His gobe ane rounde and boral hole.

    And ilk ane held ane bugle horn,
      And loud they toutit as they gaed by--
    "Ycho! ycho! The Keylan Rowe!
      Hie to the weird-hill! huntsmen hie!

    "The little wee hare o' Eildon Brae
      May trip it o'er the glen, O;
    But nane shall bear the prize away.
      But Keylan and his men, O.

    "Gil-Mouly's raid, and Keylan's Rowe,
      Shall sweep the moore and lea, O;
    And the little wee hare o' Eildon Brae
      In heaven shall never be, O.

    "O'er wizard ground, with horse and hound,
      Like rattling hail we'll bear, O--
    Ycho! ycho! The Keylan Rowe!
      The quick and dead are here, O!"

    Then came their collarit phantom tykis,
      Like ouf-dogs, an' like gaspin grews;
    An' their crukit tungis were dry for blood,
        An' the red lowe firled at their flews;

    Then came the troopis of the Fairy folke,
      And O they wore ane lovely hue!
    Their robes were greine like the hollin leife,
      And thin as the web of the wiry dew.

    And first went by the coal-black steedis,
      And then a troop o' the bonny bay;
    And then the milk-white bandis came on,
      An' last the mooned and the merlit gray.

    An' aye the sang, an' the bridles rang,
      As they rode lightly rank an' file;
    It was like the sound of ane maydenis voice
      Heard through the greene-wood many a mile.

    "Hey, Gil-Mouly! Ho, Gil-Mouly!
      On we fly o'er steep and stile!
    Hey, Gil-Mouly! Ho, Gil-Mouly!
      Hunt the hare another mile.

    "Over fen and over fountain,
      Over downe and dusky lea;
    Over moss, and moore, and mountain,
      We will follow, follow thee!

    "O'er the dewy vales of even,
      Over tower and over tree;
    O'er the clouds and clefts of heaven,
      We will follow, follow thee!

    "Nae mair the dame shall young son rock,
      And sing her lilli-lu the while;
    Hey, Gil-Mouly! Ho, Gil-Mouly!
      Hunt the hare another mile!"

    The phantom huntsmen scaled the steep,
      "Ycho! ycho! for Keylan's fame."
    The Fairy barbs were light and fleet;
      The chirling echoes went and cam.

    The roe fled into the greine-woode,
      The dun deire boundit far away;
    But nought wald serve the hunteris rude,
      But the little wee hare o' Eildon-Brae.

    She heard, she knew, an' sped alone,
      Away, away, with panting breiste;
    The fairy houndis are lilting on,
      Like Redwings wheepling through the mist.

    Around, around the Eildons greine,
      Dashit the wild huntsmen furiouslye!
    Och! sic ane night was never seine,
      Sin' Michael cleft these hills in three!

    The sky was bright, and the dame beheld
      The brattling chace o'er moonlight brow;
    Then in the darksome shade they rushit,
      With yelp, and yowle, and loud halloo.

    O, but the little Fairy grews
      Swept lightly o'er the Eildon-Brae;
    The houndis came youffing up behind,
      As fast as they could win their way.

    And the wild huntsmen's gruesome tykis
      All urgit the chace, but stop or stande.
    "Ycho! ycho! The Keylan Rowe!
      For earth, an' death, or Fairy-lande!"

    The dame she claspit the halye roode,
      And dreddour wilde was in her ee;
    And round, and round, and seven times round,
      And round about the Eildon-Tree!

    The hunt still near and nearer drew--
      Weel moght the matronis herte be wae!
    For hard they pressit, and aft they turnit
      The little wee hare o' Eildon-Brae.

    They mouthit her aince, they mouthit her twice;
      Loud did she scream throu fear and dread;
    That scream was like ane bairnyis cry
      Quhen it is piercit in cradle-bed.

    But the dame behelde ane bonny hounde,
      White as the newly driftit snaw,
    That close beside the leveret kept,
      And wore the elfin grews awa.

    Hard did she toil the hare to save,
      For the little wee hare was sair foreworne;
    And the ghaistly huntsmen gatherit on,
      With whoop, and whoo, and bugle-horne.

    O but the hounde was hard bestedd!
      For round and round they harder press'd,--
    At length, beneath the Eildon-Tree,
      The little wee leveret found its rest.

    It sprung into the matronis lap,
      Wha row'd it in her kirtle gray;
    And round, and round, came horse and hound,
      With snort, and neigh, and howl, and bay.

    But the white hounde stood by her side,
      And wore them back full powerfullye;
    And round, and round, and seven times round,
      And round about the Eildon-Tree!

    They turn'd the hare within her arms
      A cockatrice and adder sterne;
    They turn'd the hare within her arms
      A flittering reide het gaud o' ern.

    But still within her kirtle row'd,
      She sung her hymn and held it fast;
    And ere the seventh time round was won,
      Her child clung to his parent's breast.

    "Ycho! ycho! The Keylan Rowe;"
      Away the fairy music sped,
    "The day is lost, a maid has wonne,
      The babe maun lie amang the dead.

    "The babe maun grow as grass has grown,
      And live, and die, and live anew,
    Ycho! ycho! The Keylan Rowe
      Must vanish like the morning dew."




CHAPTER VI.


As the beautiful fairy-dame, or guardian spirit, or whatever she was,
had predicted, so it came to pass. The Borderers, alarmed at the danger
of the king, came down a thousand strong, thinking to surprise Douglas,
and take their monarch out of his hands by force; and they would have
effected it with ease, had not the Earl received some secret
intelligence of their design. No one ever knew whence he had this
intelligence, nor could he comprehend or explain it himself, but it had
the effect of defeating the bold and heroic attempt. They found him
fully prepared--a desperate battle ensued--120 men were left dead on the
field--and then things remained precisely in the same state as they had
been before.

The court left Melrose shortly after--the king felt as if he stood on
uncertain ground--a sort of mystery always hung around him, which he
never could develope; but ere he went, he presided at the trial of the
maiden Pery, who stood indicted, as the _Choronikkle of Mailros_ bears,
for being "Ane ranke wytche and enchaunteresse, and leigged hand and
kneife with the devil."

A secret examination of the parties first took place, and the proof was
so strong against the hapless Pery, that all hopes of escape vanished.
There was Croudy ready to make oath to the truth of all that he had
advanced with regard to his transmutation, and there were others who had
seen her coming down from the Moss-Thorn at the very time that Croudy
appeared to have been changed, just before he made his dashing entry
into the loan among the cows; and even old Father Rubely had, after
minute investigation, discovered the witch-mark, both on her neck and
thumb-nail. The king would gladly have saved her, when he beheld her
youth and beauty, but he had sworn to rid the country of witches, and no
excuse could be found. All the people of the country were sorry on
account of Pery, but all believed her guilty, and avoided her, except
Gale, who, having had the courage to visit her, tried her with the
repetition of prayers and creeds, and found that she not only said them
without hesitation, but with great devotional warmth; therefore he
became convinced that she was not a witch. She told him her tale with
that simplicity, that he could not disbelieve it, and withal confessed,
that her inquisitors had very nearly convinced her that she was a witch;
and that she was on the point of making a confession that had not the
slightest foundation in truth. The shepherd was more enlightened than
the worthy clergyman, as shepherds generally are, and accounted for
this phenomenon in a truly philosophical way. Pery assented; for
whatever Gale said sounded to her heart as the sweetest and most
sensible thing that ever was said. She loved him to distraction, and
adversity had subtilized, not abated the flame. Gale found his heart
interested--he pitied her, and pity is allied to love. How to account
for the transformation of Croudy, both were completely at a loss; but
they agreed that it was the age of witchery, and no one could say what
might happen! Gale was never from the poor culprit's side: He condoled
with her--wept over her--and even took her in his arms, and impressed a
tender kiss on her pale lips. It was the happiest moment of Pery's
existence! She declared, that since she was pure in his eyes, she would
not only suffer without repining, but with delight.

As a last resource, Gale sought out Croudy, and tried to work upon him
to give a different evidence at the last and final trial; but all that
he could say, Croudy remained obstinately bent on her destruction.

"It's needless for ye to waste your wind clatterin English, man," said
Croudy, "for foul fa' my gab gin I say ony sic word. She didna only
change me intil an ill-faurd he-sow, but guidit me shamefully ill a' the
time I was a goossy--kickit me wi' her fit, an' yerkit me wi' a rung
till I squeeled, and then leuch at me--An' warst ava, gae the butcher
her gairtens to bind me, that he might get me bled, an' plottit, an'
made into beef-steaks--de'il be on her gin I be nae about wi' her now!"

Gale, hoping that he would relent if he saw her woeful plight, besought
of him to go and see her; but this he absolutely refused, for fear lest
she should "turn him into some daft-like beast," as he expressed it.
"Let her tak it," said he, "she weel deserves a' that she's gaun to
get--the sooner she gets a fry the better--Odd, there's nae body sure o'
himsel a minute that's near her--I never gang ower the door but I think
I'll come in a goossy or a cuddy-ass--How wad ye like to gang plowin up
the gittars for worms and dockan-roots wi' your nose, as I did!"

It was in vain that Gale assured him of her innocence, and told him how
religious she was, and how well she loved him. Croudy remained
obstinate.

"I wadna gie a boddle," said he, "for a woman's religion, nor for her
love neither--mere traps for moudiworts. They may gar a fool like you
trow that ae thing's twa, an' his lug half a bannock--Gin I wad rue an'
save her life, it wadna be lang till I saw her carrying you out like a
taed in the erntings, an' thrawin ye ower the ass-midden."

Gale asked if he would save her, if she would pledge herself to marry
him, and love him for ever?

"Me marry a witch!" said Croudy--"A bonny hand she would make o' me,
sooth! Whenever I displeased her, turn me into a beast--But ilka woman
has that power," added he with a grin,--"an' I fancy few o' them
mislippin it. The first kind thought I ever had toward a woman made a
beast o' me--an' it will do the same wi' every man as weel as me, gin he
wist it. As she has made her bed, she may lie down. I shall fling a
sprot to the lowe."

Gale was obliged to give him up, but in the deepest bitterness of soul
he gave him his malison, which, he assured him, would not fall to the
ground. Pery was tried, and condemned to be choaked and burnt at the
stake on the following day; and Croudy, instead of relenting, was so
much afraid of himself, that he was all impatience until the cruel scene
should be acted. His behaviour had, however, been witnessed and detested
by some of whom he was not aware; for that very evening, as he was on
his way home, he beheld a nymph coming to meet him, whom he took for
Pery, dressed in her Sunday clothes, for one of the mysterious maids had
taken her form. He was terrified out of his wits when he beheld her at
liberty, and falling flat on his face, he besought her, with a loud
voice, to have mercy on him.

"Such as you have bestowed," said she; and giving him three strokes with
her wand, he was changed into a strong brindled cat, in which form, he
remains to this day; and the place of his abode is no secret to the
relater of this tale. He hath power one certain night in the year to
resume his natural shape, and all the functions of humanity; and that
night he dedicates to the relation of the adventures of each preceding
year. Many a secret and unsuspected amour, and many a strange domestic
scene, hath he witnessed, in his capacity of mouser, through so many
generations; and a part of these are now in the hands of a gentleman of
this country, who intends making a good use of them.

Poor Pery, having thus fallen a victim to the superstition of the times,
she wist not how, was pitied and shunned by all except Gale, whom
nothing could tear from her side; and all the last day and night that
were destined for her to live, they lay clasped in each other's arms.
While they were thus conversing in the most tender and affectionate way,
Pery told her lover a dream that she had seen the night before. She
dreamed, she said, that they were changed into two beautiful birds, and
had escaped away into a wild and delightful mountain, where they lived
in undecaying happiness and felicity, and fed on the purple blooms of
the heath.

"O that some pitying power--some guardian angel over the just and the
good, would but do this for us!" said Gale, "and release my dearest Pery
from this ignominious death!" and as he said this, he clasped his
beloved maiden closer and closer in his arms. They both wept, and, in
this position, they sobbed themselves sound asleep.

Next morning, before the rising of the sun, two young ladies, beautiful
as cherubs, came to the jailor and asked admittance to the prisoner, by
order of the king. The jailor took off his bonnet, bowed his grey head,
and opened to them. The two lovers were still fast asleep, locked in
each other's arms, in a way so endearing, and at the same time so
modest, that the two sisters stood for a considerable time bending over
them in delightful amazement.

"There is a delicacy and a pathos in this love," said the one, "into
which the joys of sense have shed no ingredient. As their innocence in
life hath been, so shall it remain;" and kneeling down, she gave three
gentle strokes with her small golden rod, touching both with it at a
time. The two lovers trembled, and seemed to be in slight convulsions;
and in a short time they fluttered round the floor two beautiful
moor-fowl, light of heart, and elated with joy. The two lovely and
mysterious visitors then took them up, wrapt them in their snowy veils,
and departed, each of them carrying one; and coming to Saint Michael's
Cross, they there dismissed them from their palms, after addressing them
severally as follows:

      "Hie thee away, my bonny moor-hen!
    Keep to the south of the Skelf-hill Pen;
    Blithe be thy heart, and soft thy bed,
    Amang the blooms of the heather so red.
    When the weird is sped that I must dree,
    I'll come and dwell in the wild with thee.
    Keep thee afar from the fowler's ken--
    Hie thee away, my bonny moor-hen."

      "Cock of the mountain, and king of the moor,
    A maiden's bennison be thy dower;
    For gentle and kind hath been thy life,
    Free from malice, and free from strife.
    Light be thy heart on the mountain grey,
    And loud thy note at the break of day.
    When five times fifty years are gone,
    I'll seek thee again 'mong the heath alone,
    And change thy form, if that age shall prove
    An age that virtue and truth can love.
    True be thy love, and far thy reign,
    On the Border dale, till I see thee again."

When the jailor related what had happened, it may well be conceived what
consternation prevailed over the whole country. The two moor-fowl were
soon discovered on a wild hill in Tiviotdale, where they have remained
ever since, until last year, that Wauchope shot the hen. He suspected
what he had done, and was extremely sorry, but kept the secret to
himself. On viewing the beauty of the bird, however, he said to
himself,--"I believe I have liked women as well as any man, but not so
well as to eat them; however, I'll play a trick upon some, and see its
effect." Accordingly he sent the moor-hen to a friend of his in
Edinburgh, at whose table she was divided among a circle of friends and
eaten, on the 20th of October 1817, and that was the final end of poor
Pery, the Maid of Eildon. The effect on these gentlemen has been
prodigious--the whole structure of their minds and feelings has
undergone a complete change, and that grievously to the worse; and even
their outward forms, on a near inspection, appear to be altered
considerably. This change is so notorious as to have become proverbial
all over the New Town of Edinburgh. When any one is in a querulous or
peevish humour, they say,--"He has got a wing of Wauchope's moor-hen."

The cock is still alive, and well known to all the sportsmen on the
Border, his habitation being on the side of Caret Rigg, which no
moor-fowl dares to approach. As the five times fifty years are very
nearly expired, it is hoped no gentleman will be so thoughtless as
wantonly to destroy this wonderful and mysterious bird, and we may then
live to have the history of the hunting, the fowling, fishing, and
pastoral employments of that district, with all the changes that have
taken place for the last two hundred and fifty years, by an eye-witness
of them.

The king returned towards Edinburgh on the 14th of September, and on
his way had twelve witches condemned and burnt at the Cross of Leader,
after which act of duty his conscience became a good deal lightened, and
his heart cheered in the ways of goodness; he hoped, likewise, to be rid
of the spells of those emissaries of Satan that had beleaguered him all
his life.

After they had passed the Esk, his two favourite white hounds were
missing; the huntsmen judged them to be following some track, and waited
till night, calling them always now and then aloud by their names. They
were however lost, and did not return, nor could they ever be found,
although called at every Cross in the kingdom, and high rewards offered.

On that very eve Elen and Clara of Rosline returned to their native
halls, after having been lost for seven weeks. They came to the verge of
the tall cliff towards the east, from whence they had a view of the
stately towers of Rosline, then in their pride of baronial strength.
The sun had shed his last ray from the summit of the distant Ochils; the
Esk murmured in obscurity far below their feet; its peaceful bendings
here and there appeared through the profusion of woodland foliage,
uniting the brightness of crystal with the hues of the raven. All the
linns and woody banks of the river re-echoed the notes of the feathered
choir. To have looked on such a scene, one might have conceived that he
dwelt in a world where there was neither sin nor sorrow; but, alas! the
imperfections of our nature cling to us; they wind themselves round the
fibres of the conscious heart, so that no draught of pure and untainted
delight can ever allay its immortal earnings. How different would such a
scene appear to perfect and sinless creatures, whose destiny did not
subject them to the terrors of death, and the hideous and mouldy
recesses of the grave! Were it possible for us to conceive that two
such beings indeed looked on it, we might form some idea of their
feelings, and even these faint ideas would lend a triple grandeur and
beauty to such an evening, and indeed to every varied scene of nature,
on which our eyes chanced to rest.

"Sister," said Clara, "we are again in sight of our native home, and the
walks of our days of innocence; say, are our earthly forms and
affections to be resumed, or are our bonds with humanity to be broken
for ever? You have now witnessed the king of Scotland's private
life--all his moods, passions, and affections--are you content to be his
queen, and sovereign of the realm?"

"Sooner would I be a worm that crawls among these weeds, than subject
myself to the embraces, humours, and caprices of such a thing--A king is
a block, and his queen a puppet--happiness, truth, and purity of heart
are there unknown--Mention some other tie to nature, or let us bid it
adieu for ever without a sigh."

"We have a widowed mother, beautiful, affectionate, and kind."

"That is the only bond with mortality which I find it difficult to
break, for it is a wicked and licentious world--snares were laid for us
on every side--our innocence was no shield--and, sister, do not you yet
tremble to think of the whirlpool of conflicting passions and follies
from which we were so timeously borne away?"

The lovely Clara bowed assent; and away they went hand in hand once more
to visit and embrace their earthly parent. They found her in the arms of
a rude and imperious pirate, to whom she had subjected herself and her
wide domains. They found themselves step-daughters in the halls that of
right belonged to them, and instead of fond love and affection, regarded
with jealousy and hate. Short and sorrowful was their stay; they
embraced their mother once again; bade her farewell with looks of
sorrow, and walking out to the fairy ring in the verge of the wood,
vanished from the world for ever. It is said, that once in every seven
years their forms are still to be seen hovering nigh to the ruins of
Rosline. Many are the wild and incomprehensible traditions that remain
of them over the country, and there are likewise some romantic scraps of
song, besides the verses that are preserved in the foregoing chapter,
which are supposed to relate to them. Many have heard the following
verses chaunted to a tune resembling a dirge:

    "Lang may our king look,
      An' sair mot he rue;
    For the twin flowers o' Rosline
      His hand shall never pu'.
    Lie thy lane, step-dame;
      An' liefu' be thy lair;
    For the bonny flowers o' Rosline
      Are gane for evermair."

           *       *       *       *       *

    "O tell nae the news in the kitchen,
      An' tell nae the news in the ha',
    An' tell nae the news in the hee hee tower
      Amang our fair ladies a'.
    How damp were the dews o' the gloamin',
      How wet were her hose and her shoon;
    Or wha met wi' fair Lady Rosline
      By the ee light o' the moon!"

           *       *       *       *       *

    "Douglas has lost his bassonet,
      The king his hawk, and milk-white hound;
    And merry Maxwell has taen the bent,
      And its hey! and its ho! for the English ground!"

           *       *       *       *       *

    "When seven lang years were come an' gane,
      By yon auld castle wa';
    There she beheld twa bonny maids
      A playing at the ba;

    But wha shall speak to these fair maids
      Aneath the waning moon;
    O they maun dree a waesome weird,
      That never will be doone!"

           *       *       *       *       *


EDINBURGH:

Printed by James Ballantyne & Co.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Duplicate title headings before each story have been removed.

The following errors in the printed text have been corrected:

p. 3 "CHAPTER ." changed to "CHAPTER I."

p. 9 "toher young" changed to "to her young"

p. 36 "mysel However," changed to "mysel. However,"

p. 64 "creeping o" changed to "creeping on"

p. 77 "femenity" changed to "femininity"

p. 100 "s en equalled" changed to "seen equalled"

p. 132 "si e o't--sa d" changed to "side o't--said"

p. 137 "remembered o" changed to "remembered so"

p. 183 "did not not like" changed to "did not like"

p. 183 "with it" changed to "with its"

p. 186 "guff." changed to "guff.""

p. 226 "whispering)," changed to "whispering,"

p. 247 "Yes, by" changed to ""Yes, by"

p. 248 "nother" changed to "another"

p. 338 "effect. Accordingly" changed to "effect. Accordingly"


The following possible errors in the printed text have been left as
printed:

p. 8 "blithsome"

p. 40 "ain house?""

p. 82 "knew not whether"

p. 142 "burried"

p. 165 "there's nought"

p. 287 "hagard"

p. 322 "aye the sang"


Quotation marks are used inconsistently where the narrator reports
dialogue, and apostrophes are used inconsistently to indicate elision;
these inconsistencies have been retained.


The following are used inconsistently in the text:

daylight and day-light

Eildon-Hall and Eildon Hall

Eildon-Tree, Eildon Tree, Eildon-tree and Eildon tree

melancholy, melancholly and mellancholly

moonlight and moon-light

round-about and round about

stake and steak

sunset and sun-set

weelfaurd and weel-faurd


The following were not clearly printed and are conjectural:

p. 165 apostrophe in "a' fair!"

p. 172 bracketed text in "informatio[n]"

p. 302 bracketed text in "triang[u]lar"

p. 323 full stop in "and cam."




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROWNIE OF BODSBECK, AND OTHER TALES (VOL. 2 OF 2) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




