The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Wreck of the Grosvenor, Volume 1 of 3
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Wreck of the Grosvenor, Volume 1 of 3


Author: William Clark Russell

Release date: December 24, 2013 [eBook #44497]
                Most recently updated: October 30, 2015

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK OF THE GROSVENOR, VOLUME 1 OF 3 ***




Produced by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR."




                                  THE
                       WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR:"

                             AN ACCOUNT OF
                    _THE MUTINY OF THE CREW AND THE
                           LOSS OF THE SHIP_
                   WHEN TRYING TO MAKE THE BERMUDAS.

                          _IN THREE VOLUMES._
                                VOL. I.

                                LONDON:
               SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE & RIVINGTON,
                  CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET.
                                 1877.

                        (_All rights reserved._)




                                LONDON:
                  PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
                   STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.




THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR."




CHAPTER I.


There was every appearance of a south-westerly wind. The coast of
France, which had been standing high and shining upon the horizon on
the port bow, and so magnified by the clear northerly air that you
could discern, even at that distance, the dim emerald sheen of the
upper slopes and the streaky shadows thrown by projecting points and
elbows on the white ground, was fast fading, though the sun still stood
within an hour of its setting beyond the bleak Foreland. The north
wind, which had rattled us with an acre of foam at our bows right
away down the river, and had now brought us well abreast of the Gull
lightship, was dropping fast. There was barely enough air to keep the
royals full, and the ship's number, which I had just hoisted at the
peak--a string of gaudy flags which made a brilliant figure against the
white canvas of the spanker--shook their folds sluggishly.

The whole stretch of scene, from the North Foreland down to the
vanishing French headlands miles away yonder, was lovely at that
moment--full of the great peace of an ocean falling asleep, of gently
moving vessels, of the solemn gathering of shadows. The town of Deal
was upon the starboard bow, a warm cluster of houses, with a windmill
on the green hills turning drowsily, here and there a window glittering
with a sudden beam of light, an inclined beach in the foreground with
groups of boats high and dry upon it, and a line of foam at its base
which sang upon the shingle so that you could hear it plainly amid
intervals of silence on board the ship. The evening sun shining over
the giant brow of the South Foreland struck the grey outline of the
cliff deep in the still water, but the clear red blaze fell far and
wide over the dry white downs of Sandwich and the outlying plains, and
threw the distant country into such bold relief against the blue sky
that, from the sea, it looked close at hand, and but a short walk from
the shore.

There were three or four dozen vessels at anchor in the Downs waiting
for a change of wind or anticipating a dead calm for some hours. A few
others, like ourselves, were swimming stealthily over the slack tide,
with every foot of their canvas piled upon them with the effort to
reach safe anchorage before the wind wholly failed and the tide turned.
A large ship, with her sails stowed and her masts and rigging showing
with the fineness of ivory-tracing against the sky, was being towed up
Channel, and the slapping of the water by the paddles of the tug, in
fast capricious revolutions, was quite audible, though both ship and
steamer were a long league distant. Here and there small boats were
rowing away from the anchored ships for the shore. Now and again you
could hear the faint distant choruses of seamen furling a big sail or
paying out more cable, the _clank, clank_ of which was as pretty as
music. Down in the east the heavens were a deep blue, flecked along the
water line with white sails, which glowed in the sunshine like beacons.

I was in a proper mood to appreciate this beautiful tranquil scene.
I was leaving England for a long spell, and the sight of that quiet
little town of Deal and the grand old Foreland cliffs shutting out the
sky, and the pale white shores we had left far astern, went right to
my heart. Well, it was just a quiet leave-taking of the old country
without words or sobs.

"The pilot means to bring up. I have just heard him tell the skipper to
stand by for a light sou'-westerly breeze. This is a _most_ confounded
nuisance! All hands, perhaps, in the middle watch to get under way."

"I expected as much," said I, turning and confronting a short,
squarely-built man, with a power of red hair under his chin, and a skin
like yellow leather through thirty years exposure to sun and wind and
dirt all over the world. This was the chief mate, Mr. Ephraim Duckling,
confidently assumed by me to be a Yankee, though he didn't talk with
his nose. I had looked at this gentleman with some doubt when I first
met him in the West India Docks. He had blue eyes, with a cast in
the port optic; this somehow made him humorous, whether or no, when
he meant to be droll, so he had an advantage over other wits. He had
hair so dense, coarse, and red withal, that he might have been safely
scalped for a door-mat. His legs were short, and his body very long and
broad, and I guessed his strength by the way his arm filled out, and
threatened to burst up the sleeve of his coat when he bent it. So far
he had been polite enough to me, in a mighty rough fashion indeed; and
as to the men, there had been little occasion for him to give orders as
yet.

"I expected as much," said I. "I have been watching the coast of France
for the last quarter of an hour, and the moisture has nearly shut it
out altogether. I doubt if we'll fetch the Downs before the calm falls."

"There's a little wind over the land, though, or that mill wouldn't be
turning."

He turned his eyes up aloft; then went to the ship's side, and looked
over. I followed him. The clear green water was slipping slowly past,
and now and again a string of sea-weed went by, or a big, transparent
jelly-fish, or a great crab floating on the top of the water. A thin
ripple shot out in a semicircle from the ship's bow, and, at all
events, we might tell that we were moving by watching the mast of the
Gull lightship sliding by the canvas of a vessel hull below the horizon
to the eastward of the sands.

Some of the hands were on the forecastle, looking and pointing towards
the shore. Others stood in a group near the galley, talking with the
cook, a fat, pale man, with flannel shirt-sleeves rolled above his
elbows. The pigs in the long-boat grunted an accompaniment to the
chattering of a mass of hens cooped under the long-boat. There was
no movement in the sea, and the great sails overhead hung without
flapping, and nothing stirred aloft but the light canvas of the royals,
which sometimes shook against the masts lazily, and with a fine distant
sound.

The skipper stood on the weather-side of the poop, against the
starboard quarter-boat, conversing with the pilot.

Have before you a tall, well-shaped man, with iron-grey hair, a thin
aquiline nose, a short compressed mouth, small dark eyes, which looked
at you imperiously from under a perfect hedge of eyebrow, and whitish
whiskers, which slanted across his cheeks; dressed in a tall hat, a
long monkey-jacket, and square-toed boots.

Captain Coxon was a decidedly good-looking man, not in the smallest
degree approaching the conventional notion of the merchant-skipper.
Happily, it is no condition of good seamanship that a man should have
bow-legs, and a coppery nose, and groggy eyes; and that he should
prefer a dish of junk to a savoury kickshaw, and screeching rum to good
wine. I had heard before I joined the _Grosvenor_ that Coxon was a
smart seaman, though a bully to his men. But this did not prejudice me.
I thought I knew my duties well enough to steer clear of his temper;
and for the rest, knowing what a seafaring life is, and how scarcely an
hour ever comes without bringing some kind of peril of its own, I would
rather any day take service under a Bashaw who knew his work, than a
mild-natured creature who didn't.

The pilot was a little dusky-faced man, with great bushy whiskers, and
a large chocolate-coloured shawl round his throat, though we were in
August. I was watching these two men talking, when Duckling said--

"It's my belief that we shall have trouble with those fellows forward.
When we trimmed sail off the North Foreland did you notice how they
went to work?"

"Yes, I did. And I'll tell you what's the matter. As I was going
forward after dinner, the cook stopped me, and told me the men were
grumbling at the provisions. He said that some of the pork served out
stunk, and the bread was mouldy and full of weevils."

"Oh, is that it!" said Duckling. "Wait till I get them to sea, and I'll
give them my affidavit now, if they like, that _then_ they'll have
something to cry over. There's a Portugee fellow among them, and no
ship's company can keep honest when one of those devils comes aboard.
He'll always find out something that's wrong, and turn and tumble it
about until it sets all hands on fire."

He went to the break of the poop and leaned, with his arms squarely
set, upon the brass rail, and stared furiously at the group of men
about the galley. Some of them grew uneasy, and edged away and got
round to the other side of the galley; others, of those who remained,
folded their arms and stared at him back, and one of them laughed,
which put him in a passion at once.

"You lazy hounds!" he bellowed in a voice of thunder, "have you
nothing to get about? Some of you get that cable range there more over
to windward. You, there, get some scrubbing-brushes and clean the
long-boat's bottom. Forecastle, there, come down out of that and see
that your halliards are clear for running! I'll teach you to palaver
the cook, you grumbling villains!" and he made a movement so full of
menace that the most obstinate-looking of the fellows got life into
them at once, and bustled about.

I looked at the skipper to see what he thought of this little outbreak;
but neither he nor the pilot paid the smallest attention to it: only,
when Duckling had made an end, the pilot gave an order which was
repeated by the chief mate with lungs of brass--

"Aft here, and clew up the mainsail and furl it!"

The men threw down the scrubbing-brushes and chain-hooks which they
had picked up, and came aft to the main-deck in a most surly fashion.
Duckling eyed them like a mastiff a cat. I noticed some smart-looking
hands among them, but they all to a man put on a lubberly air; and as
they hauled upon the various ropes which snug a ship's canvas upon the
yard preparatory to its being furled, I heard them putting all manner
of coarse, violent expressions, having reference to the ship and her
officers, into their songs.

They went up aloft slowly and laid out along the yard, grumbling
furiously. And to show what bad sailors they were, I suppose, they
stowed the sail villainously, leaving bits of the leech sticking out,
and making a bunt that must have blown out to the first cap-full of
wind.

I was rather of opinion that Duckling's behaviour was founded on
traditions which had been surrendered years ago by British seamen to
Yankee skippers and mates. He had sailed a voyage in this ship with
Coxon, and the captain therefore knew his character. That Coxon should
abet Duckling's behaviour towards the men by his silence, was a bad
augury. I reckoned that they understood each other, and that the whole
ship's company, including myself, might expect a very uncomfortable
voyage.

Meanwhile, Duckling waited until the men were off the yard and
descending the rigging: he then roared out, "Furl the mainsail!"

The men stopped coming down, and looked at the yard and then at
Duckling; and one of them said, in a sullen tone, "It is furled."

I was amazed to see Duckling hop off the deck on to the poop-rail and
spring up the rigging: I thought that he was going to thrash the man
who had answered: and the man evidently thought so too, for he turned
pale, and edged sideways along the ratline on which he stood, whilst he
held one of his hands clenched. Up went Duckling, shaking the shrouds
violently with his ungainly, sprawling way of climbing, and making the
men dance upon the ratlines. In a moment he had swung himself upon
the foot-rope and was casting off the yard-arm gaskets. I don't think
half a dozen men could have loosed the sail in the time taken by him
to do so. Down it fell, and down he came, hand over fist along the
main-topsail sheets against the mainmast, bounded up the poop-ladder,
and without loss of breath, roared out, "Furl the mainsail!"

The men seemed inclined to disobey: some of them had already reached
the bulwark: but another bellow, accompanied by a gesture, appeared to
decide them. They mounted slowly, got upon the yard, and this time did
the job in a sailor-like fashion.

"I'm only beginning with them," he said in his rough voice to me; and
then glanced at Coxon, who gave him a nod and a smile.

The pilot now told me to go forward and see everything ready for
bringing up. We were drawing close to the Downs, but the air had quite
died out and the sea stretched like oil to the horizon. I don't know
what was giving us way, for the light sails aloft hung flat, and the
smoke of a steamboat with its two funnels only showing away across the
Channel, went straight up into the sky. There must, however, have been
a faint, imperceptible tide running, but it took us another half-hour
to reach the point where the pilot had resolved to bring up, and by
that time the sun had sunk behind the great headland beyond Deal, and
was casting a broad crimson glare upon the further sea.

The royals and top-gallant sails were clewed up and furled, and then
the order was given to let go the topsail halliards. Down came the
three heavy yards rumbling along the masts, with the sound of chain
rattling over sheaves. The canvas fell into festoons, and the pilot
called, "All ready forrard?"

"All ready."

"Let go the anchor."

"Stand clear of the cable!" I shouted.

Whack! whack! went the carpenter's driving hammer. A moment's pause,
then a tremendous splash, and the cable rushed with a hoarse outcry
through the hawser hole.

When this job was over I waited on the forecastle to superintend the
stowing of the sails forward. The men worked briskly enough, and I
heard one of them who was stowing the fore-topmast stay-sail say "that
it was good luck the skipper had brought up. He didn't think he'd be
such a fool."

This set me wondering what their meaning could be; but I thought it
best to take no notice nor repeat what I had heard, as I considered
that the less Mr. Duckling had to say to the men the better we should
all get on.

It was half-past seven by the time the sails were furled and the decks
cleared of the ropes. The hands went below to tea, and I was walking
aft when the cook came out of the galley and said--

"Beg your pardon, sir; would you mind tasting of this?" And he handed
me a bit of the ship's biscuit. I smelt it and found it mouldy, and put
a piece in my mouth, but soon spat it out.

"I can't say much for this, cook," said I.

"It's not fit for dogs," replied the cook. "But, so far as I've seen,
all the provisions is the same. The sugar's like mud, and the molasses
is full of grit; and though I've been to sea man and boy two and twenty
year, I never saw tea like what they've got on board this ship. It
ain't tea--it makes the liquor yaller. It's shavings, and wot I say is,
regular tea _ain't_ shavings."

"Well, let the men complain to the captain," I answered. "He can report
to the owners and get the ship's stores condemned."

"It's my belief they wos condemned afore they came on board," answered
the cook. "I'll bet any man a week's grog that they wos bought cheap in
a dockyard sale o' rotten grub, by order o' the Admiralty."

"Give me a biscuit," said I, "and I'll show it to the captain."

He took one out from a drawer in which he kept the dough for the
cuddy's use, and I put it in my pocket and went aft.




CHAPTER II.


I will here pause to describe the ship which, being the theatre of much
that befel me which is related in this book, I should place before your
eyes in as true a picture as I can draw.

The _Grosvenor_, then, was a small, full-rigged ship of five hundred
tons, painted black, with a single white streak below her bulwarks. She
was a soft-wood vessel, built in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Her lines were
very perfect. Indeed, the beauty of her hull, her lofty masts, stayed
with as great perfection as a man-of-war's, her graceful figure-head,
sharp yacht-like bows and round stern, had filled me with admiration
when I first beheld her. Her decks were white and well kept. She had a
poop and a top-gallant forecastle, both of which I think the builder
might have spared, as she was scarcely big enough for them. There was
a good deal of brass-work on her after-decks, and more expense than
she deserved, from the perishable nature of the material of which
she was constructed, had been lavished upon her in respect of deck
ornamentation. Her richly carved wheel, brass belaying-pins, brass
capstan, brass binnacle, handsome skylights, and other such details
made her look like a gay pleasure-vessel rather than a sober trader.
Her cuddy, however, was plain enough, containing six cabins, including
the pantry. The woodwork was cheaply varnished mahogany; a fixed table
ran from the mizzen-mast to within a few feet of the cuddy front, and
on either side this table was a stout hair-covered bench. Abaft the
mizzen-mast were the two cabins respectively occupied by Captain Coxon
and Mr. Duckling. My own cabin was just under the break of the poop,
so that from the window in it I could look out upon the main-deck. A
couple of broad skylights, well protected with brass wire-fenders, let
plenty of light into the cuddy; and swinging trays and lamps, and red
curtains to draw across the skylights when the sun beat upon them,
completed the furniture of this part of the vessel.

We could very well have carried a few passengers, and I never learned
why we did not; but it may, perhaps, have happened that nobody was
going our way at the time we were advertised to sail.

We were bound to Valparaiso with a general cargo, consisting chiefly
of toys, hardware, Birmingham and Sheffield cutlery, and metal
goods, and a stock of pianofortes. The ship, to my thinking, was too
deep, as though the owners had compensated themselves for the want
of passenger-money by "taking it out" in freight. I readily foresaw
that we should be a wet ship, and that we should labour, more than was
comfortable, in a heavy sea. The steerage was packed with light goods,
bird-cages and such things, but space was left in the 'tween decks,
though the cargo came flush with the deck in the hold.

However, in spite of being overloaded, the _Grosvenor_ had beaten
everything coming down the river that day. Just off the Reculvers, for
example, when we had drawn the wind a trifle more abeam, we overhauled
a steamer. She was pretty evidently a fast screw, and her people grew
jealous when they saw us coming up astern, and piled up the fires, but
could not stop us from dropping her, as neatly as _she_ dropped an old
coal brig that was staggering near the shore under dirty canvas. But
she smothered us with her smoke as we passed her to leeward, and I dare
say they were glad to see the dose we got for our pains.

I came aft, as I have said, after leaving the baker, with the biscuit
in my pocket, and got upon the poop. The skipper had gone below with
the pilot, and they were having tea. Duckling was walking the poop,
swearing now and again at a couple of ordinary seamen, whom he had set
to work to flemish-coil the ropes along the deck, for no other reason
than that he might put as much work upon them as he could invent--for
this flemish-coiling was of no use under the circumstances, and is only
fit for Sundays on passenger ships when you want to please the ladies
with "tidy" effects, or when a vessel is in port. A watch had been
set forward, and having cast a look up aloft to see that everything
was trim, I went down the companion-ladder to the cuddy, followed by
Duckling.

The interior of the cabin looked like some old Dutch painting, for the
plain mahogany woodwork gave the place an antique air. The lamps were
alight, for it was dusk here, though daylight was still abroad upon the
sea; and the lamplight imparted a grave, old-fashioned colouring to the
things it shone upon. The skipper sat near the mizzen-mast, stirring
the sugar in a cup of tea. He looked better without than with his hat;
his forehead was high, though rather peaked, and his iron-grey hair,
parted amid-ships and brushed carelessly over his ears, gave him a
look of dignity. The coarse little pilot was eating bread and butter
voraciously, his great whiskers moving as he worked his jaws.

Duckling and I seated ourselves at the table, and I had some difficulty
to prevent myself from laughing at the odd figures Duckling and the
pilot made side by side--the one with his whiskers working like a pair
of brushes, and the other with that door-mat of red hair on his head,
and the puzzling cast of the eye that made me always doubt which one I
should address when I tried to look him full in the face.

"There's a breeze coming from the sou'-west, sir," said Duckling to the
captain. "The water's darkish out in that quarter, but I don't think
there's enough of it to swing the ship."

"Let it come favourable, and we'll get under way at once," answered
Coxon. "I had a spell of this sort of thing last year--for ten days,
wasn't it, Duckling?--because I neglected a light air that sprang up
south-easterly. I thought it couldn't have held ten minutes, but it
would have carried me well away to the French side before it failed,
and made me a free passage down, for the wind came fresh from south by
west and dead-locked me here. Mr. Royle, what's going forwards among
the men? I heard them cursing pretty freely when they were up aloft."

"They are complaining of the ship's provisions, sir," I replied. "The
cook gave me a biscuit just now, and I promised to show it to you."

Saying which, I pulled the biscuit out of my pocket and put it upon the
table. He contracted his bushy eyebrows, and, without looking at the
biscuit, stared angrily at me.

"Hark you, Mr. Royle," said he, in a voice I found detestable for the
sneering contempt it conveyed. "I allow no officer that sails under me
to become a confidant of my crew. Do you understand?"

I flushed up as I answered that I was no confidant of the crew: that
the cook had stopped me to explain the men's grievance, and that I had
asked him for a biscuit to show the captain as a sample of the ship's
bread which the steward was serving out.

"It's very good bread," said the obsequious pilot, taking up the
biscuit whilst he wiped the butter out of the corners of his mouth.

"Eat it, then!" I exclaimed.

"Damnation! eat it yourself!" cried Coxon, furiously. "You're used to
that kind of fare, I should think, and like it, or you wouldn't be
bringing it into the cuddy in your pocket, would you, sir?"

I made him no answer. I could see by the expression in Duckling's
face that he sided with the skipper, and I thought it would be a bad
look-out for me to begin the voyage with a quarrel.

"I'll trouble you to put that biscuit where you took it from," the
captain continued, with an enraged nod in the direction of my pocket,
"and return it to the blackguard who gave it, and tell him to present
Captain Coxon's respects to the men, and inform them that if they
object to the ship's bread, they're welcome to take their meals along
with the pigs in the long-boat. The butcher 'll serve them."

"Mr. Royle tells me they find the meat worse than the bread," said Mr.
Duckling. "I guess the hounds who grumble most are men who have shipped
out of workhouses, where their grub was burnt burgoo twice a day, and a
lick of brimstone to make it easy."

He laughed loudly at his own humour, and was joined by the pilot, who
rubbed his hands and swore that he hadn't heard a better joke for
years.

I made what despatch I might with my tea, not much desiring to remain
in company with Coxon in his present temper. I fancy he grew a little
ashamed of himself presently, for he softened his voice and now and
again glanced across at me. The pilot, looking up through the skylight,
called attention to the vane at the main-royal masthead, which was
fluttering to a light air from the south-west, as had been predicted,
and as I could tell by referring to the tell-tale compass, which was
swung just over where Coxon was seated. Then Coxon and his chief mate
talked of the time they meant to occupy in the run to Valparaiso. I
understood the former to say that his employers had given him eight
weeks to do it in. I should like to have said that had they added
another two to that, they would still have been imposing enough upon us
all to keep us alive. But at this point I quitted the table, giving
Coxon a bow as I rose, which he returned with a sort of half-ashamed
stiffness, and repaired to my cabin to get my pipe for a half-hour's
enjoyment of the beautiful autumn evening on deck.

I don't think tobacco has the same flavour ashore that it has at sea.
Something in the salt air brings out the full richness and aroma of it.
A few whiffs on the main-deck came like oil upon the agitation of my
mind, ruffled by Coxon's impertinence and temper. I stepped on to the
forecastle to see that the riding-lamps were all right, and that there
was a man on the look-out. The crew were in the forecastle talking in
subdued voices, and the hot air that came up through the fore-scuttle
was intolerable as I passed it. I then regained the poop, and seated
myself on the rail among the shadows of the backstays leading from the
main-royal and top-gallant masts.

The sun had gone down some time now, and only faint traces of daylight
lowered in the westward. The light on the South Foreland emitted a
most beautiful, clear, and brilliant beam, and diffused a broad area
of misty radiance on the land around. The light-beacons were winking
along the Goodwin Sands, and pretty close at hand were the lights of
Deal, a pale, fine constellation, which made the country all the darker
for their presence. The moon would not rise until after nine, but
the heavens were spangled with stars, some so lustrous that the calm
sea mirrowed them in cones of silver; and from time to time flashing
shooting-stars chased across the sky, and with their blue fires offered
a peculiar contrast to the eye with the yellow and red lights on the
water.

There was a little air moving from the southward, but so light as
scarcely to be noticeable to any man but a sailor awaiting a change.
The vessels at anchor near us loomed large in the starlit gloom that
overspread the face of the sea. Lights flitted upon them; and the
voices of men singing, the jingling of a concertina or a fiddle, the
rumbling of yards lowered aboard some new-comers which could not be
descried, and now and again the measured splash of oars, were sounds
which only served to give a deeper intensity to the solemn calm of the
night.

The inmates of the cuddy still kept their seats, and their voices came
out through the open skylights. I heard Captain Coxon say--

"I should like to know what sort of a fellow they have given me for a
second mate. He strikes me as coming the gentleman a trifle, don't he,
Duckling?"

To which the other replied, "He seems a civil-spoken young man, and up
to his work. But I guess there's too much molasses mixed with his blood
to suit my book. He wants a New Orleans training, as my old skipper
used to say. Do you know what that means, sir?" evidently addressing
the pilot. "Well, it means a knife in your ribs when you're not
disposed to hurry, and a knuckle-duster in the shape of a marlin-spike
down your throat if you stop to arguefy."

The pilot laughed and said, "Here's your health, sir. Men of your kind
are wanted nowadays, sir."

It was plain from this speech that the pilot had exchanged his tea for
something stronger. The captain here began to speak, but I couldn't
catch his words, though I strained my ears, as I was anxious to gain
all the insight I could into his character that I might know how to
shape my behaviour.

I say this for a very weighty reason--I was entirely dependent on the
profession I had adopted. I knew it was in the power of any captain I
sailed with to injure me, and perhaps ruin my prospects. Everything
in seafaring life depends upon reports and testimonials; and in these
days, when the demand for officers is utterly disproportionate to the
immense supply, owners are only too willing to listen to objections,
and take any skipper's word as an excuse to decline your services or
get rid of you.

Neither the captain nor Mr. Duckling appeared on deck again. The pilot
came up shortly after one bell (half-past eight) and looked about
him for a few minutes. The tide had swung the ship with her stern up
Channel. He went and looked over the side, and then had a stare at
Deal, but took no notice of me, whom he could very plainly see, and
returned below.

I lingered three quarters of an hour on deck, during which time the
little sigh of wind that had come from the south-west died out, and a
most perfect calm fell. The larger stars burned with amazing brilliancy
and power, and I thought it possible that the wind might go to the
eastward. This idea detained me on deck longer than I had meant to
stop, as I thought it would do me no ill service if I should be the
first to report a fair wind to the skipper, and show myself smart in
getting the hands up. Perhaps the moon would bring a breeze with her,
and as she rose at twenty minutes past nine, I filled another pipe to
await her coming.

As I struck a match, the steward came half-way up the poop-ladder to
tell me that the spirits were on the table.

"Did the captain send you?" I asked.

"No, sir," he answered. "I thought I'd let you know, as they'll be
cleared away after nine, and my orders are not to serve them again when
once they're stowed away for the night. That's the captain's rule."

"All right," said I. Another time I should have gone below and had
my glass of grog; but I considered it my best policy to keep clear
of Coxon until the temper that had been excited by my unfortunate
production of the ship's biscuit was cooled down.

I took some turns along the deck, and shortly after nine one of the
lamps in the cuddy was extinguished, and on looking through the
skylight I found that the three men had left the table. There was a
man pacing to and fro the forecastle, and I could just make out his
figure against the stars which gleamed and throbbed right down to the
horizon. The rest of the crew had evidently turned in, for I heard no
voices, and now that the talking which had been going on in the cuddy
no longer vexed the ear with rough accents, a profound silence and
peace came down upon the ship. Around me, the anchored vessels gloomed
like phantoms; the sea unrolled its dark, unbreathing surface into the
visionary distances; nothing sounded from the shore but the murmur of
the summer surf upon the shingle. One might have said that the spirit
of life had departed from the earth; that nothing lived but the stars,
which looked down upon a scene as impalpable and elusive as a dream.

At last uprose the moon. She made her coming apparent by paling the
stars in the southern sky, then by projecting a white mist of light
over the horizon. Anon her upper limb, red as fire, jetted upwards,
and the full orb, vast and feverish as the setting sun, sailed out
of the sea, most slowly and solemnly, lifting with her a black mist
that belted her like a circle of smoke: this vanished, and by degrees,
perceptible to the eye, her colour changed; the red chastened into
pearl, her disc grew smaller, and soon she was well above the horizon,
shining with a most clear and silvery splendour, and making the sea
beneath her lustrous with mild light. But not a breath of air followed
her coming. The ships in the Downs caught the new light, and their
yards showed like streaks of pearl against the night. The red lights of
the Goodwin Sands dwindled before the pure, far-reaching radiance into
mere floating sparks of fire. The heavens were cloudless, and the sea
a wonderful calm. I might keep watch all night, and still have nothing
to report; so, knocking the ashes out of my pipe, I descended the
poop-ladder and entered my cabin.




CHAPTER III.


I had slung a cot, although there was a good mahogany bunk in the
cabin. No sensible person would sleep in a bunk at sea when he could
swing in a hammock or cot. Suppose the bunk is athwart-ship: when the
vessel goes about you must shift your pillow; and very often she will
go about in your watch below and catch you asleep, so that when you
wake you find your feet are in the air, and all the blood in your body
in your head. When I first went to sea I slept in a 'thwartship bunk.
The ship was taken aback one night when I was asleep, and they came and
roared, "All hands shorten sail!" down the booby hatch. I heard the
cry and tried to get out of my bed, but my head was jammed to leeward
by the weight of my body, and I could not move. Had the ship foundered,
I should have gone to the bottom, in bed, helpless. Always after that I
slept in a hammock.

The watch on deck had orders to call the captain if a change of wind
came; also I knew that the pilot would be up, sniffing about, off and
on, through the night: so I turned in properly and slept soundly until
two; when, waking up, I drew on my small clothes and went on deck,
where I found Duckling mousing about in the moonshine in a pair of
yellow flannel drawers, he having, like myself, come up to see if any
wind was stirring. He looked like a new kind of monkey in his tight
white rig and immense head of hair. "No wind, no wind," he muttered, in
a sleepy grumble, and then went below with a run, nearly tumbling, in
fact, head over heels down the companion-ladder.

I took a turn forward to see if the riding lights burned well and
the man on the look-out was awake. The decks were wet with dew, and
the moon was now hanging over the South Foreland. The sky was still
cloudless, and not a breath of air to be felt. This being the case, I
went back to my cot.

When I next awoke I found my cot violently swinging. I thought for the
moment that we were under way and in a heavy sea; but on looking over
I saw Mr. Duckling, who exclaimed, "Out with you, Mr. Royle! There's a
good breeze from the east'ards. Look alive and call the boatswain to
pipe all hands."

Hearing this, I was wide awake at once, and in a few minutes was making
my way to the boatswain's cabin, a deck-house on the port side against
the forecastle. He and the carpenter were fast asleep in bunks placed
one over the other. I laid hold of the boatswain's leg, which hung over
the bunk--both he and the carpenter had turned in "all standing," as
they say at sea--and shook it. His great brown hairy face came out of
the bolster in which it was buried; he then threw over his other leg
and sat upright.

"All hands, sir?"

"Yes; look sharp, bo'sun."

He was about to speak, but stopped short and said, "Ay, ay, sir;"
whereupon I hurried aft.

It was twenty minutes past five by the clock in the cuddy. The sun had
been risen half an hour, and was already warming the decks. But there
was a fine breeze--not from the eastward, as Duckling had said, but
well to the northward of east--which brought ripe, fresh morning smells
from the land with it, and made the water run in little leaps of foam
against the ship's side.

Captain Coxon and the pilot were both on the poop, and as I came up the
former called out--

"Is the boatswain awake yet?"

"Yes, sir," I answered, and dived into my cabin to finish dressing. I
heard the boatswain's pipe sound, followed by the roar of his voice
summoning the hands to weigh anchor. My station was on the forecastle,
and thither I went. But none of the hands had emerged as yet, the
only man seen being the fellow on the look-out. All about us the
outward-bound vessels were taking advantage of the wind: some of them
were already standing away, others were sheeting home their canvas; the
clanking of the windlasses was incessant, and several Deal boats were
driving under their lugs among the shipping.

"Mr. Royle," cried out the captain, "jump below, will you, and see what
those fellows are about."

I went to the fore-scuttle and peered into it, bawling, "Below there!"

"There's no use singing out," said a voice; "we don't mean to get the
ship under way until you give us something fit to eat."

"Who was that who spoke?" I called. "Show yourself, my man."

A fellow came and stood under the fore-scuttle, and looking up, said in
a bold, defiant way--

"_I_ spoke--'Bill Marling, able seaman.'"

"Am I to tell the captain that you refuse to turn to?"

"Ay, and tell him we'd rather have six months of chokee than one
mouthful of his damned provisions," he answered; and immediately a lot
of voices took up the theme, and as I left the forecastle to deliver
the message, I heard the men cursing and abusing us all violently, the
foreigners particularly--that is, the Portuguese and a Frenchman, who
was half a negro--swearing in the worst English words and worst English
pronunciation, shrilly and fiercely.

Coxon pretty well knew what was coming. He and Duckling stood together
on the poop, and I delivered the men's message from the quarter-deck.

Coxon was in a great rage and quite pale with it. The expression in
his face was really devilish. His lips became bloodless, and when he
glanced his eyes around and saw the other ships taking advantage of
the fine breeze and sailing away, he seemed deprived of speech. He had
sense enough, however, with all his fury, to know that in this case no
good could come from passion. He seized the brass rail with both hands,
and made a gesture with his head to signify that I should draw nearer.

"Who was the man who gave you that message, sir?"

"A fellow who called himself Bill Marling."

"Do they refuse to leave the forecastle?"

"They refuse to get the ship under way."

"Is the boatswain disaffected?"

"No, sir; but I fancy he knows the men's minds."

He turned to Mr. Duckling.

"If the boatswain is sound, we four ought to be able to make the
scoundrels turn to."

This was like suggesting a hand to hand fight--four against twelve, and
Duckling had the sense to hold his tongue. The boatswain was standing
near the long-boat, looking aft, and Coxon suddenly called to him,
"Lead the men aft."

I now thought proper to get upon the poop; and in a short time the men
came aft in twos and threes. They were thirteen in all, including the
carpenter, four ordinary seamen, the cook, and the cook's mate. The
boatswain kept forward.

There was a capstan just abaft the mainmast, and here the men
assembled. There was not much in the situation to move one's gravity,
and yet I could scarcely forbear smiling when I looked down upon
their faces fraught with expressions so various in kind, though all
denoting the same feelings. Some were regular old stagers, fellows who
had been to sea all their lives, with great bare arms tattooed with
crucifixes, bracelets, and other such devices, in canvas or blanket
breeches and flannel shirts, with the invariable belt and knife around
their middle. Some, to judge from their clothes, had evidently signed
articles in an almost destitute condition, their clothes being complete
suits of patches, and their faces pale and thin. The foreigners were,
of course, excessively dirty; and the "Portugee's" wonderfully ugly
countenance was hardly improved by the stout silver earrings with which
his long ears were ornamented.

The first movement of mirth in me, however, was but transient. Pity
came uppermost in a few moments. I do think there is something touching
in the simplicity of sailors, in the childlike way in which they go
about to explain a grievance and get it redressed. They have few words
and little experience outside the monotonous life they follow; they
express themselves ill, are subdued by a harsh discipline on board,
or by acts of cruelty which could not be tolerated in any kind of
service ashore; the very negroes and savages of distant countries have
more interest taken in them by the people of England than sailors,
for whom scarcely a charity exists; the laws which deal with their
insubordination are unnecessarily severe; and of the persons who are
appointed to inquire into the causes of insubordination, scarce five in
the hundred are qualified by experience, sympathy, or disinterestedness
to do sailors justice.

Some such thoughts as these were in my mind as I stood watching the men
on the quarter-deck.

Coxon, with his hands still clutching the rail, said, "The boatswain
has piped you out to get the ship under way. Do you refuse?"

The man named Bill Marling made a step forward. The men had evidently
constituted him spokesman.

"We don't mean to work this here ship," said he, "until better food is
put aboard. The biscuits are not fit for dogs; and I say that the pork
stinks, and that the molasses is grits."

"That's the truth," said a voice; and the Portuguese nodded and
gesticulated violently.

"You blackguards!" burst out the captain, losing all self-control.
"What do you know about food for dogs? You're not as good as dogs to
know. Aren't you shipped out of filthy Ratcliffe Highway lodgings,
where the ship's bread and meat and molasses would be eaten by you
as damned fine luxuries, you lubbers? Turn to at once and man the
windlass, or I'll find a way to make you!"

"We say," said the spokesman, pulling a biscuit out of his bosom and
holding it up, "that we don't mean to work the ship until you give us
better bread than this. It's mouldy and full of weevils. Put the bread
in the sun, and see the worms crawl out of it."

"Will the skipper pitch the cuddy bread overboard and eat ourn?"
demanded a voice.

"And the cuddy meat along with it!" exclaimed a man, a short,
powerfully built fellow with a crisp black beard and woolly hair,
holding up a piece of pork on the blade of a knife. "Let Captain Coxon
smell this."

The captain looked at them for a few moments with flashing eyes, then
turned and walked right aft with Duckling. Here they were joined by
the pilot, and a discussion took place among them that lasted some
minutes. Meanwhile I paced to and fro athwart the poop. The men talked
in low tones among themselves, but none of them seemed disposed to give
in. For my own part, I rather fancied that though their complaint
of the provisions was justifiable enough, it was advanced rather as
a sound excuse for declining to sail with a skipper and chief mate
whose behaviour so far towards them was a very mild suggestion of the
treatment they might expect when they should be fairly at sea, and in
these two men's power. I heard my name mentioned among them and one
or two remarks made about me, but not uncomplimentary. The cook had
probably told them I was well-disposed, and I believe that some of them
would have harangued me had I appeared willing to listen.

Presently Mr. Duckling left the captain and ordered the men to go
forward. He then called the boatswain, and turning to me, said that I
was to be left in charge of the ship with the pilot whilst he and the
captain went ashore.

The boatswain came aft and got into the quarter-boat which Duckling and
I lowered; and I then towed her by her painter to the gangway, where
Duckling and the captain got into her.

As no signal was hoisted I was at a loss to conceive what course
Captain Coxon proposed to adopt. Duckling and the boatswain each took
an oar while Coxon steered, and away they went, sousing over the little
waves which the fresh land breeze had set running along the water.

By this time all the outward-bound ships had got their anchors up, and
were standing down Channel. Some of them which had got away smartly
were well around the Foreland, and we were the only one of them all
that still kept the ground. Captain Coxon's rage and disappointment
were, of course, intelligible enough; for time to him was not only
money, but credit--I mean that every day he could save in making the
run to Valparaiso would improve him in his employers' estimation.

The men peered over the bulwarks at the departing boat, wondering
what the skipper would do. There was a tide running to the southward,
and they had to keep the boat heading towards Sandwich. Strong as the
boatswain was, I could see what a much stronger oar Duckling pulled by
the way the boat's head swerved under his strokes.

I stood watching them for some time and then joined the pilot, who had
lighted a pipe and sat smoking on the taffrail. He gave me a civil nod,
being well-disposed enough now that Coxon was not by, and made some
remark about the awkwardness of the men refusing work when the breeze
was so good.

"True," said I; "but I think you'll find that the magistrates will give
it in their favour. There's some mistake about the ship's stores. Such
bread as the men have had served out to them ought never to have been
put on board, and the steward has owned to me that it's all alike."

"The captain don't intend to let it come before the magistrates,"
answered the pilot with a wink, and pulling his pipe from his mouth
to inspect the bowl. "He wants to be off, and means to telegraph for
another crew and turn those fellows yonder adrift."

"Won't he ship some better provisions?"

"I don't know, sir. Preehaps he's satisfied that the provisions is
good enough for the men, and preehaps he isn't. Leastways he'll not be
persuaded contrarily to his belief."

"So, then, the police are to have nothing to do with this matter, and
the stores will be retained for another crew?"

"That's as it may be."

"There will be a mutiny before we get to Valparaiso."

"Something 'll happen, I dare say."

I not only considered the captain's behaviour in this matter bad
morally, but extremely impolitic. His motives were plain enough. The
stores had been shipped as a cheap lot for the men to eat; and I dare
say the understanding between Coxon and the owners was that the stores
should not be changed. This view would account for his going on shore
to telegraph for a new crew, since sending the old crew about their
business would promise a cheaper issue than signalling for the police
and bringing the offenders before the magistrates, and causing the
vessel to be detained while inquiries were made. But that he would be
imperilling the safety of his vessel by shipping a fresh crew without
exchanging the bad stores for good was quite certain, and I wondered
that so old a sailor as he should be such a fool as not to foresee some
disastrous end to his own or his owners' contemptible cheese-paring
policy.

However, I had not so good an opinion of the pilot's taciturnity as to
make him my confidant in these thoughts; we talked on other matters for
a few minutes and he then went below, and after a while, on passing the
skylight, I saw him stretched on one of the cuddy benches sound asleep.

The Downs now presented a very different appearance from what they had
exhibited an hour before. There were not above four vessels at anchor,
and of those which had filled and stood away scarce half a dozen were
in sight. These were some lumbering old brigs with a barque among them,
with the water almost level with their decks; picturesque enough,
however, in the glorious morning light, as they went washing solemnly
away, showing their square sterns to the wind. A prettier sight was a
fine schooner yacht coming up fast from the southward, with her bow
close to the wind; and over to the eastward the sea was alive with
smacks, their sails shining like copper, standing apparently for the
North Sea.

The land all about Walmer was of an exquisite soft green, and in the
breezy summer light Deal looked the quaintest, snuggest little town in
the world.

A little after eight the steward called me down to breakfast, where I
found the pilot impatiently sniffing an atmosphere charged with the
aroma of broiled ham and strong coffee. I own, as I helped myself
to a rasher and contrasted the good provisions with which the cuddy
table was furnished with the bad food served to the men, that I was
weak enough to sympathize very cordially with the poor fellows. The
steward told me that not a man among them had broken his fast; this he
had been told by the cook, who added that the men would rather starve
than eat the biscuit that had been served out to them. Such was their
way of showing themselves wronged; and the steward declared that he
did not half like bringing our breakfast from the galley, for the men,
when they smelt the ham and saw him going aft with a tin of hot rolls,
became so forcible in their language that he every moment, during his
walk along the main-deck, expected to feel himself seized behind and
pitched overboard.

"It's the old story, sir," said the pilot, who was making an immense
breakfast, "and it's true enough what Mr. Duckling said last night,
which I thought uncommonly good. They ship sailors out of places where
there's nothing to be seen but rags and rum--rum and rags, sir; they
give 'em a good cabin to live in, pounds sterling a month, grog every
day at eight bells, plenty of good livin', considering what they was,
where they come from, and what they desarves: and what do they do but
turn up their noses at food which they'd crawl upon their knees to get
in their kennels ashore, and swear that they won't do ne'er a stroke of
work unless they're bribed by the very best of everything. What do they
want?--lobsters for breakfast, and wenison and plum-duff for dinner,
and chops and tamater sauce for supper? It's the ruination of owners,
sir, are these here new-fangled ideas; and I don't say--mind, I don't
say that it don't go agin pilots as a body. A pilot can't do his dooty
as he ought when he's got such crews as sarve nowadays to order about.
Here am I stuck here, with a job that I knows of waitin' and waitin'
for me at Gravesend. And all because this blessed ship's company wants
wenison and plum-duff for dinner!"

He helped himself to a large slice of broiled ham and devoured it with
sullen energy.

I could have said a word for the men, but guessed that my remarks would
be repeated to the skipper; and since I could not benefit them, there
was no use in injuring myself.

After breakfast I went upon deck, and saw a Deal boat making for the
ship. She came along in slashing style, under her broad lug--what
splendid boats those Deal luggers are, and how superbly the fellows
handle them!--and in a short time was near enough to enable me to see
that she towed our quarter-boat astern, and that Coxon and Duckling
were among her occupants. I went to the gangway to receive her: she
fell off, then luffed, running a fine semicircle; down dropped her
lug, her mizzen brought her right to, and she came alongside with
beautiful precision, stopping under the gangway like a carriage at your
door.

I caught the line that was flung from her, took a turn with it, and
then Coxon and the chief mate stepped on board. The moment he touched
the deck, Coxon called to the men who were hanging about the forecastle.

"Get your traps together, and out with you! If ever a man among you
stops in my ship five minutes, I'll fling him overboard."

With which terrible threat he walked into the cuddy. Duckling remained
at the gangway to see the crew leave the ship. The poor fellows were
all ready. They had made up their minds to go ashore, but hardly knew
under what circumstances. I had noticed them pressing forward to look
into the boat when she came alongside, no doubt expecting to see the
uniform of a police-superintendent there. The presence of such an
official would, of course, have meant imprisonment to them; they would
have been locked up until brought before the magistrates. They were
clearly disappointed by the skipper's procedure, for as they came to
the gangway, carrying their bags and chests, all kinds of remarks,
expressive of their opinion on the matter, were uttered by them.

"The old blackguard," said one, flinging his bag into the boat,
and lingering before Duckling and myself in order to deliver his
observations, "he hasn't the pluck to have us tried. Pitch us
overboard! let him try his (etc.) hand upon the littlest of us! I'd
take six months, and thank 'em, just to warm my fist on his (etc.)
face!" and so forth.

Duckling was wise to hold his peace. The men were furious enough to
have massacred him had he opened his lips.

The older hands got into the boat in silence; but none of the rest left
the ship without some candid expression of his feelings. One said he'd
gladly pay a pound for leave to set fire to the ship. Another called
her a floating workhouse. A third hoped that the vessel would be sunk,
and the brutes commanding her drowned before this time to-morrow.
Every evil wish that malice and rage could invent was hurled at the
vessel and at those who remained in her. In after days I recalled that
beautiful morning, the picture of the lugger alongside the ship, the
hungry, ill-used men with their poor packs going over the vessel's
side, and the curses they pronounced as they left us.

An incident followed the entry of the last of the men in the boat.

The sail was hoisted, the rope that held the boat let go, and her head
was shoved off; when the "Portugee," in the excitement and fury of his
feelings, drew in his breath and his cheeks, and spat with tremendous
energy at Duckling, who was watching him: but the missile fell short;
in a word, he spat full in the face of one of the old hands, who
instantly knocked him down. He tumbled head over heels among the feet
of the crowd of men, while Duckling roared out, "If the man who knocked
that blackguard down will return to his duty, I'll be his friend." But
all the answer he got was a roar which resembled in sound and character
the mingled laughter and groans of a large mob; the fresh wind caught
and filled the sail, the boat bounded away under the pressure, and in a
few minutes was a long distance out of hail.




CHAPTER IV.


A fresh crew came down from London the following morning in charge of a
crimp.

Duckling went ashore to meet them at the railway station, and they came
off in the same boat that had landed the others on the previous day.

They appeared much the same sort of men as those who had left us; badly
clothed for the most part, and but four of them had sea-chests, the
rest bringing bags. There was one very big man among them, a fellow
that dwarfed the others; he held himself erect, wore good boots, and
might very well have passed for an escaped Lifeguardsman, were it not
for the indescribable _something_ in his gait, and the way in which he
hung his hands, that marked him for a Jack.

Another fellow I noticed, as he scrambled over the ship's side,
and sung out, in notes as hoarse as a raven's, to pitch him up his
"blooming portmantey," had a very extraordinary face, altogether out
of proportion with his head, being, I dare say, a full third too
small. The back of the skull was immense, and was covered with hair
coarser than Duckling's--as coarse as hemp-yarns. This hair grew down
beside his ears, and got mixed up with streaky whiskers, which bound
up the lower part of his face like a tar poultice. Out of this circle
of hair looked a face as small as a young boy's; little half-closed
Chinese eyes, a bit of a pug nose, and a square mouth, kept open
so as to show that he wanted four front teeth. The frame belonging
to this remarkable head and face was singularly vigorous though
grievously misshapen. His long arms went far down his legs; his back,
without having a hump, was as round as a shell, and he looked as if he
measured a yard and a half from shoulder to shoulder. I watched this
strange-looking creature with great curiosity until I lost sight of him
in the forecastle.

The men bustled over the side with great alacrity, bawling for their
bags and property to be handed up in a great variety of accents. There
were two Dutchmen and a copper-coloured man, with African features,
among them; the rest were English.

The crimp remained in the boat, watching the men go on board. He was
from the other side of Jordan. His woolly hair was soaked with oil, and
shone resplendent in the sun; the oil seemed to have got into his hat,
too, for that had a most fearful polish. He wore a greatcoat that came
down to his shins, and beneath this he exhibited a pair of blue serge
breeches, terminating in boots as greasy as his hat. He was genteel
enough to wear kid gloves; but the imagination was not to be seduced by
such an artifice from picturing the dirt under the gloves.

I knew something of crimps, and amused myself with an idle speculation
or two whilst watching the man. This was a fellow who would probably
keep a lodging-house for sailors in some dirty little street leading
out of the West India Dock Road. His terms would be very easy: seven
shillings a week for board and lodging, and every gentleman to pay
for extras. He would probably have two or three amiable and obliging
sisters, daughters, or nieces living with him, knowing the generous and
blind confidence Jack reposes in the endearments of the soft sex, and
how very prodigally he will pay for them. So this greasy miscreant's
dirty West India Dock Road lodging-house for sailors would always be
pretty full, and he would never have much difficulty in mustering a
crew when he got an order to raise one. Of course it would pay him as
it pays other crimps to let lodgings to sailors, so as to have them
always about him when a crew is wanted; for will he not obligingly cash
their advance-notes for them, handing them say, thirty shillings for
three pounds ten? "What do I do with this dirty risk?" he will exclaim,
when Jack expostulates. "Supposing you cut stick? I lose my money! I
only do this to obleege you. Go into the street," he cries, pretending
to get into a passion, "and see what you'll get for your dirty piece
of paper. You'll be comin' back to me on your bended knees, with the
tears a tricklin' and runnin' over your cheeks, axing my parding for
wronging me and willin' to say a prayer of thankfulness for me bein'
put in your vay. You'll want a bag for your clothes, and here's one,
dirt cheap, five and a 'arf. And you can't go to sea vith one pair o'
brigs, and you shall have these beauties a bargain--come, fourteen and
six, for _you_, and I'll ask you not to say what you gave for 'em, or
I shall have four hundred and fifty-vun customers comin' in a rage
to tell me I'm a villin for charging of 'em a guinea for the shame
article. And here's a first-class knife and belt--something fit for the
heye to rest upon--honestly vorth 'arf a sovrin, which I'll make you a
present of for a bob, and if you say a vord I'll take everything back,
for I _can't_ stand ingratitood."

Our friend watched the crew over the vessel's side with jealous
eyes, for had they refused at the last moment to remain in the ship,
he would have been a loser to the amount he had given them for their
advance-notes. He looked really happy when the last man was out of the
lugger and her head turned for the shore. He raised his greasy hat to
Duckling, and his hair shone like polished mahogany in the sun.

"Aft here, some of you, and ship this gangway. Boatswain, pipe all
hands to get the ship under weigh," cried Duckling; and turning to me
with a wink, he added, "If the grub is going to bring more rows, we
must fight 'em on the high seas."

There was a little breeze from the south-east; quite enough to keep
the lighter sails full and give us headway against the tide that was
running up Channel. The men, zealous as all new-comers are, hastened
briskly out of the forecastle on hearing Duckling's voice and the
boatswain's whistle, and manned the windlass. The pilot was now on the
poop with the skipper, the latter looking lively enough as he heard
the quick clanking of the palls. The men broke into a song and chorus
presently, and the rude strains chimed in well with the hoarse echo of
the cable coming link by link in-board.

Presently I reported the cable up and down. Then from Duckling, the
pilot's mouthpiece, came the familiar orders--

"Loose the outer jib."

"Lay aloft, some of you, and loose the topsails."

"Up with that jib smartly, my lads."

"A hand aft here to the wheel."

The ship lay with her head pointing to the direction in which she
was going: there was nothing more to do than sheet home the topsails
and trip the anchor. The men were tolerably nimble and smart. The
three topsails were soon set, the windlass again manned, and within a
quarter of an hour from the time when the order was given, the ship was
under way, and pushing quietly through a tide that raced in a hundred
wrinkles around her bows.

We set the fore and main top-gallant sails and spanker presently: the
yards were braced sharp up, for we were heading well south, so as to
give the Foreland a wide berth. This extra canvas sent us swirling
past the red-hulled lightship off this point, and soon the Dover pier
opened, and the great white cliffs with their green heights. Anon, our
course bringing the wind more aft, we set the mainsail and main-royal
and mizzen top-gallant sail, with the staysails and jibs.

The breeze freshened as we stretched seawards; the ship was now
carrying a deal of canvas, and the men seemed pleased with her pace.

The day was gloriously fine. The sea was of an emerald green, alive
with little leaping waves each with its narrow thread of froth: the
breeze was strong enough to lay the vessel over, just so far as to
enable one looking over the weather side to see her copper, shining red
below the green line of water. The brilliant sunshine illuminated the
brass-work with innumerable glories, and shone with fluctuating flashes
in the glass of the skylights, and made the decks glisten like a
yacht's. The canvas, broad and white, towered nobly to the sky, and the
main-royal against the deep blue of the sky seemed like a cloud among
the whiter clouds which swept in quick succession high above. It was
a sight to look over the ship's bows, to see her keen stem shredding
the water, and the permanent pillar of foam leaning away from her
weather-bow.

This part of the Channel was full of shipping, and I know, by the
vividness with which my memory reproduces the scene, how beautiful
was the picture impressed upon it. All on our right were the English
shores, made delicate and even fanciful by distance; here and there
fairy-like groups of houses, standing on the heights among trees or
embosomed in valleys, with silver sands sloping to the sea: deep
shadows staining the purity of the brilliant chalk, and a foreground
of pleasure-boats with sails glistening like pearl and bright flags
streaming. And to our right and left vessels of different rigs and
sizes standing up or down Channel, some running like ourselves, free,
with streaming wakes, others coming up close-hauled, some in ballast
high out of water, stretching their black sides along the sea and
exposing to windward shining surfaces of copper.

At half-past two o'clock in the afternoon, all sail that was required
having been made, and the decks cleared, the hands were divided into
watches, and I, having charge of the port watch, came on deck. The
starboard watch went below; but as the men had not dined, a portion of
my own watch joined the others in the forecastle to get their dinner.

I now discovered that the copper-faced man, to whom I have drawn
attention, was the new cook. I heard the men bandying jokes with him as
they went in and out of the galley, carrying the steaming lumps of pork
and reeking dishes of pea-soup into the forecastle, whence I concluded
that they had either not yet discovered the quality of the provisions,
or that they were more easily satisfied than their predecessors had
been.

Among the men in my own watch was the great strapping fellow whom I
had likened to a Lifeguardsman. I had thought the man too big to be
handy up aloft, but was very much deceived; for in all my life I never
witnessed such feats of activity as he performed. His long legs had
enabled him to take two ratlines at a time, and he saved himself the
trouble of getting over the futtock shrouds by very easily making two
steps from the mainshrouds to the mainyard, and from the mainyard to
the maintop. I watched him leave the galley, carrying his smoking
mess; but I also noticed, before I lost sight of him, that he took a
suspiciously long sniff at the steam under his nose, and then violently
expectorated.

The breeze was now very lively; the canvas was stretching nobly to it,
and the shore all along our starboard beam was a gliding panorama,
brilliant with colour and sunshine. They were having dinner in the
cuddy, and as often as I passed the skylight I could see the captain
glancing upwards at the sails with a well-pleased expression.

I presently noticed the cook's copper face, crowned with an odd kind
of knitted cap, protruding from the galley, and his small eyes gazed
intently at me. I paced the length of the poop, and when I returned,
the cook's head was still at its post, and then his body came out and
he stood staring in my direction.

I had to turn abruptly to hide my mirth, for his face was ornamented
with an expression of disgust exquisitely comical with the wrinkled
nose, the arched thick mouth, and the screwed-up eyebrows.

When I again looked he was coming along the deck, swinging a piece
of very fat pork at the end of a string. He advanced close to the
poop-ladder at the top of which I was standing, and holding up the
pork, said--

"You see dis, sar?"

"Yes," I answered.

"Me belong to a country where we no eat pork," he exclaimed, with great
gravity, still preserving his wrinkled nose and immensely disgusted
expression.

"What country is that?" I asked.

"Hot country, sar," he answered. "But me will eat pork on board ship."

"Very proper."

"But me will _not_ eat stinking pork on board ship or anywhere else,"
he cried excitedly.

"Is that piece of pork tainted?" I inquired.

"Don't know nuffen 'bout tainted, sar," he replied; "but it smells
kinder strong. But not so strong as the liquor where t'other porks was
biled in. Nebber smelled de like, sar. Most disgusting. Come and try
it, sar. Make you feel queer."

"Pitch the water overboard, then."

"No good, sar. Fork'sle full of stinks, and men grumblin' like hell. Me
fust-rate cook, too--but no make a stink sweet. Dat beats me."

He held up the pork, with an expression on his face as if he were about
to sneeze, shook his finger at it as though it were something that
could be affected by the gesture, and flung it overboard.

"Dat's my rations," said he. "Shouldn't like to eat de fish dat
swallers it."

And turning jauntily in his frocked canvas breeches he walked off.

A few moments afterwards the extraordinary-looking man with the small
face and large head, and shell-shaped back, came out of the forecastle,
walking from side to side with a springing jerky action of the legs,
they being evidently moved by a force having no reference to his will.

"Ax your pardon, sir," he said, twirling up his thumb in the direction
of his forehead; "but the meat's infernal bad aboard this here wessel."

"I can't help it," I answered, annoyed to be the recipient of these
complaints, which seemed really to justify Coxon's charge of my being
the crew's confidant. "You must talk to the captain about it."

"Ne'er a man among us can eat of the pork; and the cook, as is better
acquainted than us with these here matters, says he'd rather be biled
alive than swaller a ounce of it."

"The captain is the proper person to complain to."

"That may be, sir," said the man, dropping his chin, so that by
projecting his beard his face appeared to withdraw, and grow smaller
still. "But the boatswain says there'll not be much got by complaining
to the skipper."

"I can't make the ship's stores better than they are," I replied,
moving a step, for I now perceived that some of the crew were watching
us, and I did not want the captain to come on deck and find me talking
to this man about the provisions. But it so happened that at this
particular moment the captain emerged from the companion hatchway. The
man did not stir, and the captain said--

"What does that fellow want?"

"He is complaining of the pork, sir. I have referred him to you."

He gave me a sharp look, and leaning forwards, said in a quiet, mild
voice--

"What's the matter, my man?"

"Why, sir, I've been asked to come and say that the pork that's been
served to the men is in a werry bad state, to be sure. It's more smell
than meat, and what ain't smell is brine."

"I am sorry to hear that," said the captain in a most benignant manner.
"Look into the cuddy and tell the steward I want him."

The steward stepped on to the quarter-deck and looked up at his master
in a way that made me suspect he had got his cue.

"What's the matter with the pork, steward?"

"Nothing, sir, that I know of."

"The men say it smells strong--that's what you say, I think?" remarked
the captain, addressing the man.

"Werry strong, sir--strong enough to sit upon, sir."

"I don't know how that can be," exclaimed the steward, looking very
puzzled indeed. "It's sweet enough in the cask. Perhaps it's the fault
of the biling."

"Nothing to do with the biling, mate," said the man, shaking his
extraordinary head, at the same time surveying the steward indignantly.
"Biling clears away smells as a rule."

"Perhaps you've opened a bad cask. If so," said the captain, "fling it
overboard, for I'll not have the men poisoned. Let the cook boil me a
sample from the next cask you open, and put it upon my table--do you
hear?"

"Yes, sir."

"That will do," continued the captain, addressing the man. "You may go
forward and tell your mates what I have said."

And away straggled the man to inform the crew, no doubt, that the
skipper was a brick, and that he'd like to punch the steward's head.

At seven o'clock next morning we were abreast the Isle of Wight, having
carried a strong south-easterly breeze with us as far as Eastbourne,
when the wind lulled and remained light all through the middle watch;
but after four it freshened again from the same quarter, and came on to
blow strong; but we kept the fore and main royals on her all through,
and only furled them to heave the ship to off Ventnor, where we landed
the pilot.

There was a nasty lump of a sea on just here, and some smacks making
for Portsmouth carried half sails soaking and their decks running with
water. The _Grosvenor_, owing to her weight, lay steady enough; a
little too steady, I thought, for she shipped water over her starboard
bow without rising, reminding me of a deep-laden barge, along which
you will see the swell running and washing, whilst she herself goes
squashing through with scarcely a roll.

A dandy-rigged boat put off, in response to our signal, and I enjoyed
the pretty picture she made as she came foaming, close hauled, towards
the ship, burying herself in spray as she shoved her keen nose into
the sea, and hopping nimbly out of one trough into another, so that
sometimes you could see her forefoot right out of water.

I was glad when the pilot got over the side. He was a mean toady, and
had done me no good with the captain. The gangway ladder had been
thrown over to enable him to descend, and the boat washed high and low,
up and down, alongside, sometimes level with the deck, sometimes twelve
or fourteen feet in a hollow.

"Now's your time," said I, mischievously, as he hung on to the man-rope
with one leg out to catch the boat as she rose. He took me at my word
and let go; but the boat was sinking, and down he went with her, and I
had the satisfaction of seeing him roll right into the boat's bottom,
and there get so hopelessly entangled with the pump and some trawling
gear, that it took two boatmen to pull him out and set him on his feet.

Then away they went, the pilot waving his hat to the skipper, who
cries--

"Man the lee main braces."

The great yards were swung around, and the ship lay over to the immense
weight of canvas.

"Ease off those jib-sheets there, and set the mainsail."

The ship, feeling the full breeze, surged slowly forwards, parting the
toppling seas with thundering blows of her bows. She had as much sail
on her as she could well carry, and a trifle to spare, for the breeze
had freshened whilst we had been lying to, a couple of vessels to
windward were taking in their fore and mizzen top-gallant sails, and
ahead was a smart brig with a single reef in her fore-topsail. The wind
was well abeam, perhaps half a point abaft, and every sail was swollen
like the cheeks of rude Boreas in the picture of that bleak worthy.

This cracking on delighted Duckling, whose head turned so violently
about as he stared first at these sails, then at those, then forward,
then aft, that I thought he would end in putting a kink into his neck.

"This is proper!" he exclaimed, in his hoarse voice, after ordering
some hands "to clap the watch-tackle on to the main-tack and rouse it
down." "We'll teach 'em how to froth this blessed Channel! I guess
we've had enough of calms, and if the Scilly ain't some miles astern by
the second dog-watch to-morrow I'll turn a monk, you see!"

We were heading well west-south-west, and the water was flying in
sheets of foam from the ship's bows. By this time it was dark, and the
sky thick with the volume of wind that swept over it; the stars shone
hazily, but it was as much as I could do to trace the outlines of the
main-royal and top-gallant sail.

The vessel was rushing through the water at a great pace. I felt as
exhilarated as one new to the life when I looked astern and saw the
broad path of foam churned by the ship rising and falling and fading
upon the desolate gloom of the hilly horizon. Blue fires burnt in
the water; but, by-and-by, when by stretching out we had got into
the broader sea, and the vessel plunged to the heavier waves which
were running, big flakes of phosphorescent light were hurled up with
the water every time the ship pitched, and for twenty fathoms astern
the water was as luminous as the Milky Way. The roaring of the wind
on high, the creaking of the spars, the clanking and grinding of the
chain-sheets, the squeal of sheaves working on rusty pins, the hissing
and spitting of the seething foam, and ever and anon the sullen thunder
of a sea striking the ship, filled the ear with a wonderful volume of
sound. The captain was cracking on to make up for lost time, and he
was on deck when I went below at ten o'clock to get some rest before
relieving Duckling at midnight. There were then two hands at the wheel,
and a couple on the look-out; our lamps were burning bravely, but we
had long ago outrun all sight of shore and of lights ashore.

I slept soundly, and at eight bells Duckling roused me up. The
unpleasantest part of a sailor's life is this periodical turning out
of warm blankets to walk the deck for four hours. The rawness of
the night air is anything but stimulating to a man just awake and
very sleepy. Let the wind be never so steady, the decks are full of
powerful draughts rushing out of the sails and blowing into your eyes
and ears and up the legs of your trousers, and down the collar of your
shirt, turn where you will: and you think, as your hair is blown over
your eyes and a shower of spray comes pattering upon your oilskins
and annoying your face, of your sheltered cabin and warm cot, and
wonder what, in the name of common sense, caused you to take to this
uncomfortable profession. The crew in this respect are better off than
their officers; for the watch on deck at night can always manage to
sneak into the forecastle and dose upon their chests, or on the deck
and keep under shelter; whereas the mate in charge must be always wide
awake and on his legs throughout his watch, and shirk nothing that the
heavens may choose to pour upon his defenceless person.

I had four hours before me when I went on deck, and I may perhaps have
wished myself ashore in a quiet bed. The captain stood near the wheel.
It was blowing very fresh indeed, the wind about east-southeast, with
a strong following sea. The yards had been braced further aft, but no
other alteration had been made since I had gone below. If I had thought
that the vessel was carrying too much sail then, I certainly thought
that she was carrying a great deal too much sail now. She could have
very well dispensed with the main-royal and two top-gallant sails, and
in my opinion would have made the same way with a single reef in the
topsails. The press of canvas was burying her. Well aft as the wind
was, the vessel lay over to starboard under it, and she was dragging
her heavy channels sluicing and foaming through the water. The moon
was weak, with a big ring round her, and the sky was obscured by the
scud which fled swiftly away to the north-west. The horizon was thick,
and the troubled sheen of the moon upon the jumping seas made the dark
waters, with their ghastly lines of phosphorescent foam, a most wild
and weird panorama.

I mustered the watch, and a couple of them went to relieve their mates
on the forecastle. A night-glass lay on one of the skylights, and I
swept the horizon with it, but nothing was to be seen. I walked aft to
see how she was steering, for these heavy following seas lumping up
against a ship's quarter play the deuce with some vessels, making the
compass-card swing wildly and setting the square sails lifting; but
found her steering very steadily, though the rush of some of the seas
under her counter might have bewildered a two-thousand-ton ship. She
rose, too, better than I thought she would, though she was sluggish
enough, for some of the seas ran past her with their crests curling
above her lee bulwarks, and she had received one souser near the
galley; but her decks to windward were dry.

Coxon was smoking a big Dutch pipe, holding it with one hand and the
rail with the other. He had a hair cap on with flaps over his ears,
and sea-boots, and all that he was doing was first to blow a cloud and
then look up at the sails, and then blow another cloud and then look up
again. This would appear to have been going on since nine o'clock. I
thought he must be pretty tired of his diversion by this time.

"She bears her canvas well, sir," said I.

"Yes," he answered gruffly, "I have lost twenty-four hours. I ought to
have been clear of the Channel by this."

"She is a fast vessel, sir. We are doing good twelve, I should say."

He cast his eyes over the stern, then looked up aloft, but made no
answer. I was moving away when he exclaimed--

"Go forward and tell the men to keep a bright look-out. And keep your
weather-eye lifting yourself, sir."

I did as he bade me, and got upon the forecastle. I found the two men
who were indistinguishable from the poop, wrapped in oilskins leaning
against the forecastle rail. It blew harder here than it did aft, for
a power of wind rushed slanting from the fore-topmast stay-sail and
whirled up from under the foot of the foresail. The crashing sound of
the vessel's bows, urged through the heavy water by the great power
that was bellowing overhead, was wonderful to hear: an uproar of
thunder was all around, mingled with wild shrieking cries and the
strange groaning of straining timbers. The moon stood away to windward
of the mizzen royal-mast head, and it was a sight to look up and see
the grey canvas, full like balloons, soaring into the sky, and to hear
the mighty rush of the wind among the rigging as the vessel rolled
against it, making the moon whirl across her spars to and fro, to and
fro.

I had been on deck three quarters of an hour when, feeling the wind
very cold, I dived into my cabin for a shawl to wrap round my neck.

I had hardly left the cuddy door to return, when I heard a loud cry
from the forecastle, and both hands roared out simultaneously, "A sail
right ahead!"

Coxon walked quickly forward to the poop-rail to try to see the vessel
to windward. Then he went over to the other side and peered under the
mainsail; after which he said, "I see nothing. Where is she?"

I shouted through my hands, "On which bow is she?"

"Right ahead!" came the reply.

"There was a short pause, and then one of the men roared out, "Hard
over! we're upon her! She's cutter rigged! she's a smack!"

"Hard a-port! hard a-port!" bawled Coxon.

I saw the spokes of the wheel fly round, but almost at the same moment,
I felt a sudden shock--an odd kind of _thud_, the effect of which upon
my senses was to produce the impression of a sudden lull in the wind.

"God Almighty!" bellowed a voice, "we've run her down!"

In a second I had bounded to the weather-side of the poop and
looked over, and what I saw sliding rapidly past, was a mast and a
dark-coloured sail, which in the daylight would probably be red,
stretched flat upon the wilderness of foam which our ship was sweeping
off her sides. Upon this ghastly white ground the sail and mast were
distinctly outlined--for a brief moment only--they vanished even as I
watched, swallowed up in the seething water. And then all overhead the
sails of the ship began to thunder, and the rigging quivered and jerked
as though it must snap.

"Hard over! hard over!" bellowed Coxon.

I saw him rush to the wheel, thrust away one of the men, and pull the
spokes over with all his force. The vessel answered splendidly, swerved
nobly round like a creature of instinct, and was again rushing headlong
with full sail over the sea.

This was a close shave. At the speed at which she was travelling she
had obeyed the rudder in the first instance so promptly as to come
round close to the wind. A few moments more and she would have been
taken aback; and this, taking into consideration the amount of canvas
she was carrying, must infallibly have meant the loss of most, if not
of all, her spars.

Horrified by the thoughts of living creatures drowning in our wake, I
cried out to the skipper--

"Won't you make an effort to save them, sir?"

"Save them be hanged!" he answered fiercely. "Why the devil didn't they
get out of our road?"

I was so much shocked by the coarse inhumanity of this reply, that I
turned on my heel; but yet was constrained by an ugly fascination to
turn again and cast shuddering glances at the spot where I pictured
the drowning wretches battling with the waves.

Captain Coxon was too intent upon the compass to notice my manner; he
was giving directions to the men in a low voice, with his eyes fixed on
the card.

Presently he exclaimed, in his gruffest voice, "Call the carpenter to
sound the well."

This was soon despatched, and I returned and reported a dry bottom.

"Heave the log, sir."

I called a couple of hands aft and went through the tiresome and
tedious job of ascertaining the speed by the measured line and
sand-glass. The reel rattled furiously in the hands of the man who held
it: I thought the whole of the line would go away overboard before the
fellow who was holding the glass cried, "Stop!"

"What do you make it?" demanded Coxon.

"Thirteen knots, sir."

He looked over the side as though to assure himself that the
computation was correct, then called out--

"Clew up the main-royal, and furl it!"

This was a beginning, and it was about time that a beginning was made.
The breeze had freshened into a strong wind, this had grown into half a
gale, and the look of the sky promised a whole gale before morning. The
main-royal halliards were let go, and a couple of hands went up to stow
the bit of canvas that was thumping among the clouds.

Presently, "Furl the fore and mizzen top-gallant sails."

This gave occupation to the watch; and now the decks began to grow
lively with the figures of men running about, with songs and choruses,
with cries of "Belay, there!"--"Up with it smartly, my lads!" and with
the heavy flapping of canvas.

All this, however, was no very great reduction of sail. The _Grosvenor_
carried the old-fashioned single topsails, and these immense spaces
of canvas were holding a power of wind. Overhead the scud flew fast
and furious, and all to windward the horizon was very thick. We took
in the main-top-gallant sail; and while the hands were aloft we
came up hand over fist with a big ship, painted white. She was to
leeward, stretching away under double-reefed topsails, and showed out
quite distinctly upon the dark sea beyond, and under the struggling
moonshine. We ran close enough to take the wind out of her sails, and
could easily have hailed her had there been any necessity to do so; but
we could discern no one on deck but a single hand at the wheel. She
showed no lights, and with her white hull and glimmering sails, and
fragile naked yards and masts, she looked as ghostly as anything I ever
saw on the water. She rolled and plunged solemnly among the seas, and
threw up her own swirling outline in startling relief upon the foam she
flung from her side, and which streamed away in pyramid-shape. She went
astern like a buoy, and in a few minutes had vanished as utterly from
our sight as if she had foundered.

I now stood waiting for an order which I knew must soon come. It is one
thing to "carry on," but it is another thing to rip the masts out of a
ship. I don't think we had lost half a knot in speed through the canvas
that had been taken in: the vessel seemed to be running very nearly as
fast as the seas. But the wind was not only increasing, but increasing
with squalls, so that there were times when you would have thought
that the inmates of forty mad-houses had got among the rigging and out
upon the yards, and were screeching, yelling, and groaning with all the
force they were master of.

At last the captain gave the order I awaited.

"All hands reef topsails."

In a few minutes the boatswain's pipe sounded, and the watch below came
tumbling out of the forecastle. Now came a scene familiar to every man
who has been to sea, whether as a sailor or a passenger. In a ship of
war the crew go to work to the sound of fiddles or silver whistles;
every man knows his station; everything is done quickly, quietly, and
completely. But in a merchantman the men go to work to the sound of
their own voices: these voices are, as a rule, uncommonly harsh and
hoarse; and as every working party has its own solo and chorus, and
as all working parties sing together, the effect upon the ear, to say
the very least, is hideous. But also in a merchantman the crew is
always less in number than they ought to be. Hence, when the halliards
are let go, the confusion below and aloft becomes overwhelming; for
not more, perhaps, than a couple of sails can be handled at a time,
and, meanwhile, the others waiting to be furled are banged about by
the wind, and fling such a thunder upon the ear that orders are scarce
audible for the noise.

All this to a certain degree happened in the present instance. The
captain having carried canvas with fool-hardy boldness, now ran into
the other extreme. The quick fierce gusts which ran down upon the
ship frightened him, and his order was to let go all three topsail
halliards, and double-reef the sails. The halliards were easily let
go; but then, the working hands being few, confusion must follow. The
yards coming down upon the caps, the sails stood out in bellies hard
as iron. A whole watch upon each reef-tackle could hardly bring the
blocks together. When the mizzen-topsail was reefed, it was found that
the fore-topsail would require all hands; the helm had to be put down
to shake the sail, so as to enable the men to make the reef-points
meet. The main-topsail lifted as well as the fore-topsail, and both
sails rattled in unison; and the din of the pealing canvas, furiously
shaken by the howling wind, the cries of the men getting the sail over
to windward, the booming of the seas against the ship's bows, the
groaning of her timbers, the excited grunting of terrified pigs, and
the rumbling of an empty water-cask, which had broken from its lashings
and was rolling to and fro the main-deck, constituted an uproar of
which no description, however elaborate, could even faintly express
the overwhelming character.

When the dawn broke it found the _Grosvenor_ under reefed topsails,
fore-topmast, staysail, foresail, main-trysail, and spanker, snug
enough, but with streaming decks, for the gale had raised a heavy
beam sea, and the deep-laden ship was sluggish, and took the water
repeatedly over her weather-bulwarks.

The watch below had turned in again, but it was already seven bells,
and at four o'clock my turn would come to go to bed. I had charge of
the ship, for the captain having passed the night in observing his
vessel's sailing powers under all canvas, had gone below, and I was not
sorry to get rid of him, for his continued presence aft had become a
nuisance to my eyes.

The sea under the gathering light in the east was a remarkable sight.
The creaming arching surfaces of the waves took the pale illumination,
but the troughs or hollows were livid, and looking along the rugged
surface as the ship rose, one seemed to behold countless lines of
yawning caverns opening in an illimitable waste of snow. Nothing could
surpass the profound desolation of the scene surveyed in the faint
struggling dawn, the pallid heaven, bearing its dim and languishing
stars, over which were swept long lines of smoke-coloured clouds torn
and mangled by the wind; the broken ocean pouring and boiling away to
a melancholy horizon, still dark, save where the dawn was creeping
upwards with its chilly light, and making the eastern sea and sky
leaden-hued.

I had now leisure to recall the fatal accident I have related, and
the inhumanity of Captain Coxon's comment upon it. I hugged myself in
my thick coat as I looked astern at the cold and rushing waters, and
thought of the bitter sudden deaths of the unfortunates we had run
down. With what appalling rapidity had the whole thing happened! not
even a dying shriek had been heard amid the roar of the wind among the
masts. For many a day the memory of that dark-coloured sail, prone
upon the foaming water, haunted me. The significance of it was awful
to think upon. But for the men on the look-out, never a soul among us
would have known that living beings had been hurled into sudden and
dreadful death, that the ship in which we sailed had perchance made
widows of sleeping wives, had made children fatherless, and that ruin
and beggary and sorrow had been churned up out of the deep by our
unsparing bows.

Our voyage had begun inauspiciously enough, God knows: and as I looked
towards the east where the morning light was kindling over the livid,
rugged horizon, a strange depression fell upon my spirits, and the
presentiment then entered my mind and never afterwards quitted it, that
perils and suffering and death were in store for us, and that when I
had looked on the English coast last night I was unconsciously bidding
farewell to scenes I should never behold again.




CHAPTER V.


I was on deck again at eight o'clock. It was still blowing a gale, but
the wind had drawn right aft, and though the topsails were kept reefed,
Duckling had thought fit to set the main top-gallant sail, and the ship
was running bravely.

Yet, though her speed was good, she was rolling abominably; for the
wind had not had time to change the course of the waves, and we had now
all the disadvantage of a beam sea without the modifying influence over
the ship's rolling of a beam wind.

I reckoned that we had made over one hundred and thirty knots during
the twelve hours, so that if the gale lasted, we might hope to be clear
of the Scilly Isles by next morning. There was a small screw steamer
crossing our bows right ahead, possibly hailing from France and bound
to the Bristol Channel. I watched her through a glass, sometimes
breathlessly, for in all my life I never saw any vessel pitch as she
did, and live. Sometimes she seemed to stand clear out of water so as
to look all hull: then down she would go and leave nothing showing
but a bit of her funnel sticking up with black smoke pouring away
from it. Several times when she pitched I said to myself, "Now she is
gone!" Her bows went clean under, heaving aloft a prodigious space of
foam: up cocked her stern, and, with the help of the glass, I could
see her screw skurrying round in the air. Her decks were lumbered
with cattle-pens, but the only living thing I could see on board was
a man steering her on the bridge. She vanished all on a sudden, amid
a Niagara of spray; but some minutes after I saw her smoke on the
horizon. Had I not seen her smoke I should have been willing to wager
that she had foundered. These mysterious disappearances at sea are by
no means rare; but are difficult to account for, since they sometimes
happen when the horizon is clear. I have sighted a ship and watched
her for some time: withdrawn my eyes for a minute, looked again, and
perceived no signs of her. It is possible that mists of small extent
may hang upon the sea, not noticeable at a distance, and that they
will shut out a vessel suddenly and puzzle you as a miracle would.
The fascinating legend of the "Phantom Ship" may have originated in
disappearances of this kind, for they are quite complete and surprising
enough to inspire superstitious thoughts in such plain, unlettered
minds as sailors'.

They were breakfasting in the cuddy and in the forecastle, and I was
waiting for the skipper to come on deck that I might go below and get
something to eat. But before he made his appearance, the confounded
copper-coloured cook, accompanied by a couple of men, came aft.

"Sar," said this worthy, who looked lovely in a pink-striped skirt and
yellow overalls, "me ask you respeckfly to speak to de skipper and tell
him him biscuit am dam bad, sar."

"I'm messman for the starboard watch, sir," exclaimed one of the men,
"and the ship's company says they can't get the bread down 'em nohow."

"Why do you come to me?" I demanded of them angrily. "I have already
told you, cook, that I have nothing to do with the ship's stores. You
heard what Captain Coxon said yesterday?"

"Can't the steward get us up a fresh bag of bread for breakfast?"
exclaimed the third man.

"He's in the cuddy," I replied; "ask him."

They bobbed their heads forward to see through the cuddy windows, and
at that moment Duckling came on deck up through the companion.

"You can get your breakfast," said he to me. "I'll keep watch until
you've done."

"Here are some men on the quarter-deck complaining of the bread," said
I. "Will you speak to them?"

He came forward at once, very briskly, and looked over.

"What's the matter?" he called out.

"We've come to complain of the ship's bread, sir," said one of the men,
quite civilly.

"Dam bad bread, sar. Me honest man and speak plain truff," exclaimed
the cook, who possibly thought that his position privileged him to be
both easy and candid on the subject of eating.

"Get away forward!" cried Duckling, passionately. "The bread's good
enough. You want to kick up a shindy."

The men made a movement, the instinct of obedience responding
mechanically to the command. But the cook held his ground, and said,
shaking his head and convulsing his face--

"De bread am poison, sar. All de flour's changed into worms. Nebber see
such a ting. It get here"--touching his throat--"and make me--yaw!"

"Go forward, I tell you, you yellow-faced villain!" shouted Duckling.
"D'ye hear what I say?"

"Dis chile is a cook," began the fellow; but Duckling sprang off the
poop, and with his clenched fist struck him full under the jaw: the
poor devil staggered and whirled round, and then up went Duckling's
foot, and cook was propelled at a great pace along the main-deck
towards the galley. He stopped, put his hand to his jaw, and looked
at the palm of it; rubbed the part that had been kicked, turned and
held up his clenched fist, and went into the galley. The two other men
disappeared in the forecastle.

"Curse their impudence!" exclaimed Duckling, remounting the poop-ladder
and polishing his knuckles on the sleeve of his coat. "Now, Mr. Royle,
get you down to your breakfast. I want to turn in when you've done."

I entered the cuddy, not very greatly edified by Duckling's way of
emphasizing his orders, and made a bow to the captain, who was still
at table. He condescended to raise his eyes, but for some minutes
afterwards took no notice of me whatever, occupying himself with
glancing over a bundle of slips which looked like bill-heads in his
hand.

The vessel was rolling so heavily that the very plates slided to and
fro the table, and it not only required dexterity, but was no mean
labour to catch the coffee-pot off the swinging tray as it came like
a pendulum over to my side, and to pour out a cup of coffee without
capsizing it. The mahogany panelling and cabin doors all round creaked
incessantly, and in the steward's pantry there was a frequent rattle of
crockery.

"What was going forward on the main-deck just now?" demanded Coxon,
stowing away the papers in his pocket, and breaking fragments from a
breakfast roll.

I explained.

"Ah!" said he; "they're still at that game, are they?"

"Mr. Duckling punched the cook's head----"

"I saw him, sir. Likewise he kicked him. Mr. Duckling knows his duty,
and I hope he has taught the cook his. Steward!"

"Yes, sir?" responded the steward, coming out of the pantry.

"See that a piece of the pork you are serving out to the men is put
upon my table to-day."

"Yes, sir."

The captain fell into another fit of silence, during which I ate my
breakfast as quickly as I could, in order to relieve Duckling.

"Mr. Royle," said he presently, "when we ran that smack down this
morning, what were you for doing?"

"I should have hove the ship to," I replied, meeting his eyes.

"Would you have hove her to had you been alone on deck, sir?"

"Yes, and depended on your humanity to excuse me."

"What do you mean by my humanity?" he cried, dissembling his temper
badly. "What kind of cant is this you have brought on board my ship?
Humanity! Damn it!" he exclaimed, his ungovernable temper blazing out:
"had you hove my ship to on your own hook, I'd have had you in irons
for the rest of the voyage."

"I don't see the use of that threat, sir," said I, quietly. "You have
to judge me by what I did do, not by what I might or would do."

"Oh, confound your distinctions!" he went on, pushing his hair over his
ears. "You told me that you would have hove the ship to had you been
alone, and that means you would have whipped the masts out of her. Do
you mean to tell me that you knew what sail we were carrying, to talk
like this?"

"Perfectly well."

My composure irritated him more than my words, and I don't know what
savage answer he was about to return; but his attention was on a sudden
arrested and diverted from me. I turned my eyes in the direction in
which he was staring, and beheld the whole ship's company advancing
along the main-deck, led by the big seaman whose name was Johnson, and
by the tortoise-backed, small-faced man who was called Fish--Ebenezer
Fish.

The moment the captain observed them, he rose precipitately, and ran up
the companion-ladder; and as I had finished breakfast, I followed him.

By the time I had reached the break of the poop the hands were all
gathered about the mainmast. A few of them held tin dishes in their
hands, in which were lumps of meat swimming in black vinegar. One
carried some dozen biscuits supported against his breast. Another held
a tin pannikin filled with treacle, and another grasped a salt-jar, or
some such utensil, containing tea.

The _coup d'oeil_ from the poop was at this moment striking. All around
was a heavy sea with great waves boiling along it; overhead a pale blue
sky, along which the wildest clouds were sweeping. The vessel running
before the wind under double-reefed topsails, rolled deeply both to
port and to starboard, ever and anon shipping a sheet of green water
over her bulwarks, which went rushing to and fro the decks, seething
and hissing among the feet of the men, and escaping, with loud
bubbling noises, through the scupper-holes.

I was almost as soon on deck as Coxon, and therefore heard the opening
address of Johnson, who, folding his arms upon his breast, and "giving"
on either leg, so as to maintain his equilibrium while the deck sloped
to and fro under him, said in a loud, distinct voice--

"The ship's company thinks it a dooty as they owe theirselves to come
aft altogether to let you know that the provisions sarved out to 'em
ain't eatable."

"Out, all hands, with what you've got to say," replied Coxon, leaning
against the rail, "and when you've done I'll talk to you."

"Now then, mates, you hear what the skipper says," exclaimed Johnson,
turning to the others.

Just then I noticed the copper face of the cook, who was skulking
behind the men, with his eyes fixed, flashing like a madman's, upon
Duckling.

The fellow with the biscuits came forward, but a heavy lurch at that
moment made him stumble, and the biscuits rolled out of his arms. They
were collected officiously by the others, and placed again in his
hands, all sopping wet; but he said, in a collected voice--

"These here are the starboard watch's bread. Ne'er a man has tasted of
them. We've brought 'em for you to see, as so be it may happen that you
aren't formiliar with the muck the steward sarves out."

"Hand up a dry one," said the skipper.

A man ran forward and returned with a biscuit, which the captain took,
broke, smelt, and tasted. He then handed it to Duckling, who also smelt
and tasted. After which he (the captain) said, "Fire away!"

The fellow with the biscuits withdrew, and one of the men, bearing the
pork swimming in vinegar, advanced. He was a Dutchman, and was heard
and understood with difficulty.

"My mates they shay tat tiss pork ish tam nashty, an' it isshn't pork
ash I fanshy; but Gott knowsh what it iss; an' I shwear it gifs me ta
shtomack-ache--by Gott, it doess, sir, ass I am a man."

This speech was received with great gravity by the men as well as
Coxon, who answered, "Hand it up."

The mess was shoved through the rail and poked at by the skipper with a
pen-knife; he even jobbed a piece of it out and put it into his mouth.
I watched for a grimace, but he made none. He handed the tin dish as he
had the biscuit to Duckling, who looked at it closely and put it on the
deck.

"The next?" said the captain.

The Dutchman, looking as a man would who is conscious of having
discharged a most important duty, hustled back among the others, and
the man with the treacle came out.

"This, sir, is what the steward's givin' us for molasses," said he,
looking into the pannikin.

The captain made no answer.

"And though his senses are agin him, he goes on a callin' of it
molasses."

Another pause.

"But to my way of thinkin' it ain't no more molasses than it's oysters.
It's biled black-beetles, that's what I call it, and you want a
toothpick as strong as a marlin-spike to get the shells out o' your
teeth arter a meal of it."

"Hand it up," said the captain, from whom every moment I was expecting
an explosion of temper. He did not offer to taste the stuff, but
inspected it with apparent attention, and tilted the vessel first this
way and then that, that the treacle might run.

"Here's your molasses," said he, handing down the pannikin. "What else
is there?"

"We're willin' to call this tea," said a man, holding up an earthenware
jar filled with a black liquor; "but it ain't tea like what they sells
ashore, an' it ain't tea like what I've bin used to drink on board
other wessels. It's tea," continued he, looking first into the jar and
then at the skipper, "and yet it ain't. Maybe it was growed in England,
for there isn't no flavour of Chaney about it. It's too faint for
'bacca-leaves, and it ain't sweet enough for liquorish. Fish here says
it's the mustiness as makes it taste like senna."

Here followed a pause, during which the men gazed eagerly at the
skipper. I noticed some angry and even sinister countenances among
them; and the cook looked as evil as a fiend, with his hard yellow face
and gleaming eyes staring upwards under his eyebrows. But so far there
had been nothing in the men's speeches and behaviour to alarm the most
timid captain; and I thought it would require but little tact and a
few kindly concessions to make them, on the whole, a hard-working and
tractable crew.

The captain having kept silence for some time, exchanged looks with
Duckling, and called to know if the men had any more complaints to
make. They talked among themselves, and Johnson answered "No."

"Very well, then," said he. "I can do nothing for you here. There are
no bake-houses yonder," nodding at the sea, "to get fresh bread from.
You must wait till we get to Valparaiso."

A regular growl came up from the men, and Johnson exclaimed--

"We can't live on nothing till we get to Valparaiso."

"What do you want me to do?" cried the skipper savagely.

"It's not for us to dictate," replied Johnson. "All that the crew wants
is grub fit to eat."

"Put into Brest," exclaimed a voice. "It ain't fur off. There's good
junk and biscuit to be got at Brest."

"Who dares to advise me as to what I'm to do?" shouted the skipper in
his furious way. "By Heaven, I'll break every bone in the scoundrel's
body if he opens his infernal mutinous mouth again. I tell you I
can't change the provisions here, and I'm not going to alter the
ship's course with this wind astern, not if you were all starving in
reality." But having said this he pulled up short, as if his temper
were diverting him from the line of policy he had in his mind to
follow; he lowered his voice and said, "I'll tell you what, my lads;
you must make the provisions serve you for the present, and if I can
make a fair wind of it, I'll haul round for some Spanish port: or if
not there, I'll see what land is to be picked up."

"You hear what the captain says, don't you?" growled Duckling.

"It isn't us that minds waiting, it's our stomachs," said Fish, the
small-faced man.

"Do you mean to tell me you can't get a meal out of the food in your
hands?" demanded the captain, pointing amongst them.

"We'd rayther drink cold water than the tea," said one.

"And the water ain't over-drinkable, neither," exclaimed another.

"The cook shays te pork 'll gif us te cholera," said one of the
Dutchmen.

"We wouldn't mind if the bread an' molasses was right," cried Fish.
"But they aren't. Nothen's right. The werry weevils ain't ordinary;
they're longer an' fatter nor common bread-worms."

"Hold your jaw!" bawled Duckling. "The captain has spoke you fairer
than any skipper that ever I sailed under would have spoke. So now cut
forward--do you hear?--and finish your breakfast. Cook, come out from
behind the mainmast, you loafing nigger, and leave the main-deck, or
I'll make you trot to show the others the road."

He pulled a brass-belaying pin out of the rail and flourished it.
The captain walked aft to the wheel, leaving Duckling to finish
off with the men. They moved away, talking in low grumbling tones
among themselves, manifestly dissatisfied with the result of their
conference, and presently were all in the forecastle.

"I'll tell you what it is, Mr. Royle," said Duckling, turning
impudently upon me; "you must wake up, if you please, and help me to
keep those fellows in their place. No use in staring and listening. You
must talk to 'em and curse 'em, damme! do you understand, Mr. Royle?"

"No, I don't understand," I replied. "I don't believe in cursing men.
I've seen that sort of thing tried, but it never answered."

"Oh, I suppose you are one of those officers who call all hands to
prayers before you reef down, are you?" he asked, with a coarse,
sneering laugh. "I don't think Captain Coxon will appreciate your
services much if that's your kind."

"I am sorry you should misunderstand me," I answered gravely. "I
believe I can do my work and get others to do theirs without foul
language and knocking men down."

"Thunder and lightning! what spooney skipper nursed _you_ at his
breast? Could you knock a man down if you tried?"

I glanced at him with a smile, and saw him running his eyes over me
as though measuring my strength. There was enough of me, perhaps, to
make him require time for his calculations. Sinewy and vigorous as his
ill-built frame was, I was quite a match for him--half a head taller,
and weighed more, with heavier arms upon me and a deeper chest than he;
and was eight and twenty, whilst he was nearly fifty.

"I think," said I, "that I _could_ knock a man down if I tried. Perhaps
two. But then I don't try, and must be badly provoked in order to try.
The skipper who nursed me was not a New Orleans man, but an Englishman,
and something better--an English gentleman. That means that no one on
board his ship ever gave him occasion to use his fists."

He muttered something about my thinking myself a very fine sort of
bird, no doubt, but I could not catch all that he said owing to the
incessant thundering of the gale; he then left me and joined the
captain, who advanced to meet him, and they both went below.

It was now pretty plain that I was unsuited for the taste and society
of the two men with whom I was thrown. The captain saw I was not likely
to help his paltry views, and that my sympathy was with the crew; and
try as I might, I could _not_ disguise my real contempt for Duckling.
They were great chums, and thoroughly relished each other's nature.
They were both bullies, and, in addition, Duckling was a toady. Hence
it was inevitable--but less from the subordinate position that I filled
than from the dislike I had of these men's characters--that I should
be an outsider, distrusted by the skipper as objecting to his dealings
with the crew and capable of opposing them, and hated by Duckling for
the contempt of him I could not disguise. Much as I regretted this
result and had done what I could to avert it, now that it was thrust
upon me, I resolved to meet it quietly. For the rest of that watch,
therefore, I amused myself by shaping my plans, which simply amounted
to a determination to do my duty as completely as I could, so as to
deprive Coxon of all opportunity of making my berth more uncomfortable
than it was; to hold my tongue, to take no notice of the skipper's
doings, to steer as clear of Duckling as possible, and to quit the
ship, if possible, at Valparaiso. How I kept these good resolutions you
shall hear.




CHAPTER VI.


The weather mended next day, and we made all sail with a fine breeze,
steering south-south-west. We had left the Downs on Tuesday, the 22nd
of August, and on the 25th we found by observation that we had made a
distance of over 900 miles, which, considering the heavy seas the ship
had encountered and the depth to which she was loaded, was very good
sailing.

However, though we carried the strong north-westerly wind with us all
day, it fell calm towards night, then shifted ahead, then drew away
north, and then fell calm again. We were now well upon the skirts of
the Bay of Biscay, and the heavy swell for which that stretch of sea is
famous, did not fail us. All through the night we lay like the ship in
the song, rolling abominably, with Coxon in a ferocious temper on deck,
routing up the hands to man first the port, and then the starboard
braces, bousing the yards about to every whiff of wind, like a madman
in the Doldrums, until both watches were exhausted. All this work was
put upon us, merely because the skipper was in a rage at the calm, and
not caring to rest himself, determined that his crew should not; but
for all the good this slueing the yards about did, he might as well
have laid the mainyards aback, and waited until some wind really came.

Early in the morning a light breeze sprang up aft, and the fore-topmast
stun'-sail was run up, and the ship began to move again. This breeze
held steady all day, and freshened a bit at night--but being right aft
scarcely gave us more than six knots when liveliest. However, it saved
the men's arms and legs, and enabled them to go about other and easier
work than manning braces, stowing sails, and setting them again.

And so till Wednesday, the 31st of August, on which day we were, to the
best of my memory, in latitude 45° and longitude about 10°.

The men during this time had been pretty quiet. The boatswain told me
that grumbling among them was as regular as meal-times; but no murmurs
came aft, no fresh complaints were made to the skipper. The reason was,
I think, the crew believed that the skipper meant to touch at Madeira
or one of the more southerly Canary Islands. That this was their notion
was put into my head by a question asked me by a hand at the wheel
when I was alone on deck: would I tell him where the ship was?

I gave him the results of the sights taken at noon.

"That's to the east'ard of Madeery, ain't it, sir?"

"Yes."

He bent his eyes on the compass-card, and seemed to be reflecting on
the ship's course. The subject dropped; but after he had been relieved,
and was gone forward, I saw him talking to the rest of the watch: and
one of them knelt down and drew some kind of figure with a piece of
chalk upon the deck (it looked to me, and doubtless was, a rude chart
of the ship's position), whereupon the cook began to jabber with great
vehemence, extending his hands in the wildest way, and pulling one
of the men close to him, and whispering in his ear. They noticed me
watching them, presently, and broke up.

Had I been on friendly terms with Coxon or Duckling, I should have
made no delay in going to one or the other of them and communicating
my misgivings; for misgivings I had, and pretty strong misgivings
they were. But I perfectly well foresaw the reception my hints would
meet with from both Duckling and the captain. I really believed that
the latter disliked me enough now to convert my apprehension of
trouble into some direct charge against me. He might swear that I had
sympathized all along with the crew--and this I had admitted--and that
if the mutiny which my fears foreboded broke out, I should be held
directly responsible for it and treated as the ringleader. Besides,
there was another consideration that influenced me: my misgivings
_might_ be unfounded. I might make a report which would not only
imperil my own position, but provoke him into assuming an attitude
towards the men which would produce in reality the mutiny that might,
as things went, never come to pass. This consideration more than
anything else decided me to hold my tongue, to let matters take their
course, and to leave the captain and his chief mate to use their own
eyesight, instead of obtruding mine upon them.

When I left the deck at four o'clock on the Wednesday afternoon, there
was a pleasant breeze blowing directly from astern, and the ship was
carrying all the canvas that would draw. The sky was clear, but pale,
like a winter's sky, and there was a very heavy swell rolling up from
the southward. The weather, on the whole, looked promising, and,
despite the north-easterly wind, the temperature was so mild that I
could have very well dispensed with my pilot jacket.

There was something, however, about the aspect of the sun which struck
me as new and strange. Standing high over the western horizon it should
be brilliant enough: and yet it was possible to keep one's eye fixed
upon it for some moments without pain. It hung indeed, a fluctuating
molten globe in the sky, without any glory of rays. This seemed to me
a real phenomenon, viewed with respect to the _apparent_ purity of the
sky; but of course I understood that a mist or fog intervened between
the sight and the sun, though I never before remembered having seen
the sun's disc so dim in brilliancy and at the same time so _clean_ in
outline in a blue sky.

I looked at the barometer before entering my cabin and found a
slight fall. Such a fall might betoken rain, or a change of wind
to the southward. In truth, there is no telling what a rise or fall
in the barometer _does_ betoken, beyond a change in the density of
the atmosphere. I would any day rather trust an old sailor's or an
old farmer's eye: and as to weather forecasts, based upon a thousand
fantastic hobbies, I liken them to dreams, of which every one remembers
the one or two that were verified, and forgets the immense number that
were never fulfilled.

Throughout the dog-watches the weather still held fair; but the glass
had fallen another bit and the wind was dropping. Captain Coxon had
very little to say to me now and I to him. I was just civil, and he was
barely so; but when I was taking a glass in the cuddy preparatory to
turning in for three hours, he asked me what I thought of the weather.

"It's difficult to know what this swell means, sir," I answered.
"Either it comes in advance of a gale or it follows a gale."

"In advance," he said. "If you are going to turn in, keep your clothes
on. There was a thundering gale in the sun this afternoon, and if you
clap your nose over the ship's side you'll smell it coming."

Oddly as he expressed himself, he was quite serious, and I understood
him.

As the wind grew more sluggish, the vessel rolled more heavily. I never
was in a cuddy that groaned and strained more than this, owing to the
mahogany fittings having shrunk and warped away from their fixings.
Up through the skylights it was pitch dark, from the effect of the
swinging lamps within; and though both skylights were closed, I could
hear the sails flapping like sharp peals of artillery against the
masts, and the gurgling, washing sob of the water as the roll of the
ship brought it up through the scupper-holes.

Just then Duckling overhead sang out to the men to get the fore-topmast
stun'-sail in: and Coxon at once quitted the cabin and went on deck.
There was something ominous in the calm and darkness of the night and
the voluminous heaving of the sea, and I made up my mind to keep away
from my cabin a while longer. I loaded a pipe and posted myself in a
corner of the cuddy front. Had this been my first voyage, I don't think
I should have found more difficulty in keeping my legs. The roll of the
vessel was so heavy that it was almost impossible to walk. I gained the
corner by dint of keeping my hands out and holding on to everything
that came in my road; but even this nook was uncomfortable enough to
remain in standing, for, taking the sea-line as my base, I was at
one moment reclining at an angle of forty degrees, the next, I had to
stiffen my legs forward to prevent myself from being shot like a stone
out of the corner and projected to the other side of the deck.

The men were at work getting in the fore-topmast stun'-sail, and some
were aloft rigging in the boom. There was no air to be felt save the
draughts wafted along the deck by the flapping canvas. Even where I
stood I could hear the jar and shock of the rudder struck by the swell,
and the grinding of the tiller-chains as the wheel kicked. The sky
was thick with half a dozen spars sparely glimmering upon it here and
there. The sea was black and oily, flashing fitfully with spaces of
phosphorescent light which gleamed below the surface. But it was too
dark to discern the extent and bulk of the swell: that was to be felt.

Duckling's voice began to sound harshly, calling upon the men to bear
a hand, and _their_ voices, chorusing up in the darkness, produced a
curious effect. So far from my being able to make out their figures,
it was as much as I could do to trace the outlines of the sails. After
awhile they came down, and immediately Duckling ordered the fore
and main royals to be furled. Then the fore and mizzen top-gallant
halliards were let go, and the sails clewed up ready to be stowed when
the men had done with the royals. So by degrees all the lighter sails
were taken in, and then the whole of the watch was put to close-reef
the mizzen-topsail.

As I knew one watch was not enough to reef the other topsails, and
that all hands would soon be called, I put my pipe in my pocket and
got upon the poop. Duckling stood holding on to the mizzen-rigging,
vociferating, bully-fashion, to the men. I walked to the binnacle and
found that the vessel had no steerage way on her, and that her head was
lying west, though she swung heavily four or five points either side
of this to every swell that lifted her. The captain took no notice of
me, and I went and stuck myself against the companion-hatchway and had
a look around the horizon which I could not clearly see from my former
position on the quarter-deck.

The scene was certainly very gloomy. The deep, mysterious silence, made
more impressive by the breathless rolling of the gigantic swell, and
by the impenetrable darkness that overhung the water-circle, inspired
a peculiar awe in the feelings. The rattle of the canvas overhead had
been in some measure subdued; but the great topsails flapped heavily,
and now and again the bell that hung just abaft the mainmast tolled
with a single stroke.

It was a relief to turn the eye from the black space of ocean to the
deck of the ship catching a lustre from the cuddy lights.

Duckling, perceiving my figure leaning against the hatchway, poked his
nose into my face to see who I was.

"I believed you were turned in," said he.

"I thought all hands would be called, and wished to save myself
trouble."

"We shall close-reef at eight bells," said he, and marched away.

This was an act of consideration towards the men, as it meant that the
watch below would not be called until it was time for them to turn out.
At all events the ship was snug enough now, come what might, even with
two whole topsails on her. Having close-reefed the mizzen-topsail, the
hands were now furling the mainsail, and only a little more work was
needful to put the ship in trim for a hurricane. So I took Duckling's
hint and laid down to get some sleep, first taking a peep at the glass
and noting that it was dropping steadily.

Sailors learn to go to sleep smartly and to get up smartly. And they
also learn to extract refreshment out of a few winks, which is an
art scarce any landsman that I am acquainted with ever succeeded in
acquiring. I was awakened by one of the hands striking eight bells, and
at once tumbled up and got on deck.

The night was darker than it was when I had gone to my cabin; no star
was now visible, an inky blackness overspread the confines of the
deep, and inspired a sense of calm that was breathless, suffocating,
insupportable. The heavy swell still rose and sunk the vessel, washing
her sides to the height of the bulwarks, and making the rudder kick
furiously.

The moment Coxon saw me he told me to go forward and set all hands to
close-reef the fore-topsail. I did his bidding, calling out the order
as I went stumbling and sprawling along the main-deck, and letting go
the halliards to wake up the men, after groping for them. Indeed, it
was _pitch_ dark forward. I might have been stone-blind for anything
I could see, barring the thin rays of the forecastle lamp glimmering
faintly upon a few objects amidships.

Owing to this darkness it was a worse job to reef the topsails than had
it been blowing a hurricane in daylight. It was a quarter to one before
both sails were reefed, and then the watch that had been on deck since
eight o'clock turned in.

Here were we now under almost bare poles, in a dead calm; and yet had
the skipper ordered both the fore and mizzen topsails to be furled, he
would not have been doing more than was justified by the extraordinary
character of the night--the strange and monstrous sub-swell of the
ocean, the opacity of the heavens, the sinister and phenomenal
breathlessness and heat of the atmosphere.

Duckling was below, lying at full length upon one of the cuddy benches,
ready to start up at the first call. I glanced at him through the
skylight, and wondered how on earth he kept himself steady on his
back. I should have been dislodged by every roll as surely as it came.
Perhaps he used his shoulder-blades as cleats to hold on to the sides
of the bench; and to so wildly proportioned a man as Duckling, a great
deal was possible.

The card was swinging in the binnacle as before, and just now the
ship's head was north-west. With more canvas upon the vessel her
position would have been perilous by the impossibility of guessing from
what quarter the wind would come--if it came at all. Even to be taken
aback under close-reefed topsails might prove unpleasant enough, should
a sudden gale come down and find the ship without way on her.

The captain, who was on the starboard side of the wheel, called me over
to him.

"Are the decks clear?"

"All clear, sir."

"Fore-topsail sheets?"

"Ready for running, sir."

"How's her head now?" to the man at the helm.

"Nor'-west, half north."

"Keep a brisk look-out to the south'ard, sir," he said to me; "and sing
out if you see the sky clearing."

I saw him, by the binnacle-light, put his finger in his mouth and hold
it up. But there was no other air to be felt than the short rush first
one way, then another, as the ship rolled.

Scarcely ten minutes had passed since he addressed me, when I saw what
I took to be a ship's light standing clear upon the horizon, right
astern.

I was about to call out when another light sprang up just above it.
Then a small, faint light, a little to the westward of these, then
another.

Owing to the peculiar character of the atmosphere these lights looked
red, and so completely was I deceived by their appearance, that I
halloed out--

"Do you see those lights astern, sir? They look like a fleet of
steamers coming up."

But I had scarcely spoken when I knew that I had made a fool of
myself. They were not ships' lights, _but stars_, and at once I
comprehended the import of this sudden astral revelation.

"Stand by the starboard braces!" roared the skipper; and the men, awake
to a sense of a great and perhaps perilous change close at hand, came
shambling and stumbling along the deck.

A wonderful panorama was now being rapidly unfolded in the south.

All down there the sky was clearing as if by magic, and the stars
shining; but as I watched, great flying wreaths like mighty volumes
of smoke pouring out of gigantic factory chimneys, came rushing over
and obscuring them, though always leaving a few brightly burning
in a foreground which advanced with astonishing rapidity towards
the ship. To right and left of this point of the horizon, the sky
cleared only to be obscured afresh by the flying clouds. Soon, amid
the solemn pauses falling upon the ship between the intervals of her
pitching, for she had now swung right before the swell, we could hear
the coming whirlwind screeching along the surface of the water. The
contrast of its approach with the oily, breathless, heaving surface
of the sea around us and all ahead, and the utter stagnation of the
air, produced an effect upon my mind, and, I believe, upon the minds
of all others who were witnesses of the sight, to which no words
could give expression--an emotion, if you like, of suspense that was
almost terror, and yet terror deprived of pain by a wild and tingling
curiosity.

But such a gale as I am describing travels quickly: all overhead the
sky was first cleared and then massed up with whirling clouds, before
the wind struck us: the white surface of the sea, cleanly lined like
the surf upon a beach, was plainly seen by us, even when the water all
around was still unruffled; and _then_, with a prolonged and pealing
yell, the gale and the spray it was lashing out of the sea were upon
us. In a moment our decks were soaking--the masts creaked, and every
shroud and stay sang to the sudden, mighty strain; the vessel staggered
and reeled--stopped, as a heavy swell rolled under her bows, and threw
her all aslant against the hurricane, which screeched and howled
through the rigging, and then fled forwards under the yards, which had
squared themselves as the starboard braces were slackened.

It was lucky for the _Grosvenor_ that the gale struck her astern. So
great was its fury that, had it taken her aback, I doubt if she would
have righted.

This furious wind had cleared the horizon, and the water-line all
around was distinctly figured against the sky. The sea was a sheet
of foam, and, what will scarcely seem credible, the swell _subsided_
under the lateral pressure of the wind, so that for a short time we
seemed to be racing along a level surface of froth. Large masses of
this froth, bubbly and crackling like wood in a fire, were jogged clean
off the water and struck the decks or sides of the ship with reports
like the discharge of a pistol, and no more than a handful of water
blown against my face hit me with such force, that for some moments I
suffered the greatest torment, as though my eyes had been scalded, and
I hardly knew whether I had not lost my sight.

The wind was blowing true from the south and we were bowling before it
due north, losing as much ground every five minutes as had taken us
an hour to get during the day. Coxon, however, was _feeling_ the gale
before he brought the ship close: at any moment, you see, the wind
might chop round and blow a hurricane; though, to be sure, the sky with
its torn masses of skurrying clouds had too wild an aspect to make us
believe that this gale was likely to be of short duration.

The sea now began to rise, and it was strange to watch it. First it
boiled in short waves which the wind shattered and blew flat. But other
waves rose, too solid for the wind to level: they increased in bulk as
they ran, and broke in coils of spray, while fresh and larger waves
succeeded, and the ship began to pitch quickly in the young sea.

The wonderful violence of the wind could not be well appreciated by us
who were running before it; but when the crew manned the braces and
the helm was put to starboard, it seemed as if the wind would blow
the ship out of the water. She came to slowly, laying her main-deck
level with the sea, and the screeching of the wind was diabolical and
absolutely terrifying to listen to. With the weather leeches just
lifting, she was still well away from her course, and her progress
under all three topsails was all leeway.

But I soon saw that she could not carry two of the three topsails,
owing to the tremendous sudden pressure put upon the masts by her
lurches to windward; and sure enough Duckling (who had turned out along
with all hands when the gale had first struck the ship) roared through
a speaking-trumpet to clew up and furl the fore and mizzen topsails.

It took all hands to deal with each sail separately, and I helped to
stow the fore-topsail.

To be up aloft in weather of the kind I am describing is an experience
no landsman can realize by imagination. To begin with, it is an immense
job to _breathe_, for the wind stands like something solid in your
mouth, and up your nostrils, and makes the expelling of your breath a
task fitter for a one-horse engine than a pair of human lungs. Then you
have two remorseless forces at work in the shape of the wind and the
sail doing their utmost to hurl you from the yard. The fore-topsail
was snugged as well as bunt-lines and clew-lines, hauled taut as steel
bars, could bring it; and besides, there were already three reefs in
it. And yet it stood out like cast-iron, and all hands might have
danced a horn-pipe upon it without putting a crease into the canvas
with their united weight. We had to roar out to Duckling to put the
helm down, and spill the sail, before we could get hold of it; and so
fiercely did the canvas shake in the hurricane as the ship came to,
that I, who stood in the bunt, expected to see the hands out at the
yard-arms shaken off the foot-ropes, and precipitated into the sea.

But what a wildly picturesque scene was the ocean surveyed from the
height of the foremast! The sea was now heavy, and furiously lashing
the weather bow; avalanches of spray ran high up the side, and were
blown in a veil of hurtling sleet and froth across the forecastle.
Casting my eyes backwards, the ship looked forlornly naked with no
other canvas on her than the close-reefed main-topsail, with the bare
outlines of her main and after yards, and the slack ropes and lines
blown to leeward in semicircles, surging to and fro in long sweeps
against the stars, which glimmered and vanished between the furiously
whirling clouds. The hull of the vessel looked strangely narrow and
long, contemplated from my elevation, upon the boiling seas; the
froth of the water made an artificial light, and objects on deck were
clear now, which, before the gale burst upon us, had been wrapped in
impenetrable darkness.

When the sail was furled, all hands laid down as smartly as they could;
but just under the foretop the rush of wind was so powerful, that when
I dropped my leg over the edge to feel with my foot for the futtock
shrouds, my weight was entirely sustained and buoyed up, and I believe
that had I let go with my hands, I should have been blown securely
against the fore-shrouds and there held.

The ship was now as snug as we could make her, hove to under
close-reefed main-topsail and fore-topmast staysail, riding tolerably
well, though, to be sure, the wind had not yet had time to raise much
of a sea. The crew were fagged by their heavy work, and the captain
ordered the steward to serve out a tot of grog apiece to them, more out
of policy than pity, I think, as he would remember what was in their
minds respecting their provisions, and how the ship's safety depended
on their obedience.




CHAPTER VII.


All that night it blew terribly hard, and raised as wild and raging a
sea as ever I remember hearing or seeing described. During my watch,
that is, from midnight until four o'clock, the wind veered a couple of
points, but had gone back again only to blow harder, just as though it
had stepped out of its way a trifle to catch extra breath.

I was quite worn out by the time my turn came to go below, and though
the vessel was groaning like a live creature in its death-agonies, and
the seas thumping against her with such shocks as kept me thinking that
she was striking hard ground, I fell asleep as soon as my head touched
the pillow, and never moved until routed out by Duckling four hours
afterwards.

All this time the gale had not bated a jot of its violence, and the
ship laboured so heavily that I had the utmost difficulty in getting
out of the cuddy on to the poop. When I say that the decks fore and
aft were streaming wet, I convey no notion of the truth; the main-deck
was simply _afloat_, and every time the ship rolled, the water on her
deck rushed in a wave against the bulwarks and shot high in the air, to
mingle sometimes with fresh and heavy inroads of the sea, both falling
back upon the deck with the boom of a gun.

I had already ascertained from Duckling that the well had been sounded
and the ship found dry; and therefore, since we were tight below, it
mattered little what water was shipped above, as the hatches were
securely battened down fore and aft, and the mast-coats unwrung. But
still she laboured under the serious disadvantage of being overloaded;
and the result was her fore parts were being incessantly swept by seas
which at times completely hid her forecastle in spray.

Shortly after breakfast Captain Coxon sent me forward to despatch
a couple of hands on to the jib-boom to snug the inner jib, which
looked to be rather shakily stowed. I managed to dodge the water on
the main-deck by waiting until it rolled to the starboard scuppers,
and then cutting ahead as fast as I could; but just as I got upon the
forecastle, I was saluted by a green sea which carried me off my legs
and would have swept me down on the main-deck had I not held on stoutly
with both hands to one of the fore shrouds. The water nearly drowned
me, and kept me sneezing and coughing for ten minutes afterwards. But
it did me no further mischief, for I was encased in good oilskins and
sou'wester, which kept me as dry as a bone inside.

Two ordinary seamen got upon the jib-boom, and I bade them keep a
good hold, for the ship sometimes danced her figurehead under water
and buried her spritsail yard, and when she sank her stern her flying
jib-boom stood up like the mizzen-mast. I waited until this job of
snugging the sail was finished, and then made haste to get off the
forecastle, where the seas flew so continuously and heavily that had
I not kept a sharp look-out I should several times have been knocked
overboard.

Partly out of curiosity and partly with a wish to hearten the men, I
looked into the forecastle before going aft. There were sliding doors
let into the entrance on either side the windlass, but one of them was
kept half open to admit air, the fore-scuttle above being closed. The
darkness here was made visible by an oil-lamp, in shape resembling a
tin coffee-pot with a wick in the spout, which burnt black and smokily.
The deck was up to my ankles in water, which gurgled over the pile
of swabs that lay at the open entrance. It took my eye some moments
to distinguish objects in the gloom, and then by degrees the strange
interior was revealed. A number of hammocks were swung against the
upper deck, and around the forecastle were two rows of bunks, one atop
of the other. Here and there were sea-chests lashed to the deck, and
these, with the huge windlass, a range of chain-cable, lengths of rope,
odds and ends of pots and dishes, with here a pair of breeches hanging
from a hammock, and there a row of oilskins swinging from a beam,
pretty well made up all the furniture that met my eye.

The whole of the crew were below. Some of the men lay smoking in their
bunks, others in their hammocks with their boots over the edge; one
was patching a coat, another greasing his boots, others were seated in
a group talking, whilst under the lamp were a couple of men playing
at cards upon a chest, three or four watching and holding on by the
hammocks over their heads.

A man, lying in his bunk with his face towards me, started up and sent
his legs, encased in blanket trousers and brown woollen stockings,
flying out.

"Here's Mr. Royle, mates!" he called out. "Let's ask him the name of
the port the captain means to touch at for proper food, for we aren't
goin' to wait much longer."

"Don't ask me any questions of that kind, my lads," I replied promptly,
seeing a general movement of heads in the bunks and hammocks. "I'd
give you proper victuals if I had the ordering of them; and I have
spoken to Captain Coxon about you, and I am sure he will see this
matter put to rights."

I had difficulty in making my voice heard, for the striking of the seas
against the ship's bows filled the place with an overwhelming volume of
sound, and the hollow, deafening thunder was increased by the uproar of
the ship's straining timbers.

"Who the devil thinks," said a voice from a hammock, "that we're going
to let ourselves be grinded as we was last night, without proper
wittles to support us? I'd rather have signed articles for a coal-barge
with drownded rats to eat from Gravesend to Whitstable, than shipped
in this here cursed wessel, where the bread's just fit to make savages
retch!"

I had not bargained for this, but had merely meant to address them
cheerily, with a few words of approval of the smart way in which they
had worked the ship in the night. Seeing that my presence would do
no good, I turned about and left the forecastle, hearing as I came
away one of the Dutchmen cry out: "Look here, Mishter Rile, vill you
be pleashed to ssay when we are to hov' something to eat?--for, by
Gott! ve vill kill te dom pigs in the long-boat, if the shkipper don't
mindt--so look out!"

As ill-luck would have it, Captain Coxon was at the break of the poop,
and saw me come out of the forecastle. He waited until he had got me
alongside of him, when he asked me what I was doing among the men.

"I looked in to give them a good word for the work they did last
night," I answered.

"And who asked you to give them a good word, as you call it?"

"I have never had to wait for orders to encourage a crew."

"Mind what you are about, sir!" he exclaimed in a voice tremulous with
rage. "I see through your game, and I'll put a stopper upon it that you
won't like."

"What game, sir? Let me have your meaning."

"An infernal mutinous game!" he roared. "Don't talk to me, sir! I know
you! I've had my eye upon you! You'll play false if you can, and are
trying to smother up your damned rebel meanings with genteel airs! Get
away, sir!" he bellowed, stamping his foot. "Get away aft! You're a
lumping, useless encumbrance! But, by thunder! I'll give you two for
every one you try to give me! So stand by!"

And apparently half-mad with his rage he staggered away in the
very direction in which he had told me to go, and stood near the
wheel, glaring upon me with a white face, which looked indescribably
malevolent in the fur cap and ear protectors that ornamented it.

I was terribly vexed by this rudeness, which I was powerless to resist,
and regretted my indiscretion in entering the forecastle after the
politic resolutions I had formed. However, Captain Coxon's ferocity
was nothing new to me; truly I believed he was not quite right in his
mind, and expected, as in former cases, that he would come round a bit
by-and-by, when his insane temper had passed. Still, his insinuations
were highly dangerous, not to speak of their offensiveness. It was no
joke to be charged, even by a madman, with striving to arouse the crew
to mutiny. Nevertheless, I tried to console myself as best I could
by reflecting that he could not prove his charges; that I need only
endure his insolence for a few weeks, and that there was always a law
to vindicate me and punish him should his evil temper betray him into
any acts of cruelty against me.

The gale, at times the severest that I was ever in, lasted three
days, during which the ship drove something like eighty miles to the
north-west. The sea on the afternoon of the third day was appalling:
had the ship attempted to run, she would have been pooped and smothered
in a minute; but lying close, she rode fairly well, though there
were moments when I held my breath as she sunk into a hollow like a
coal-mine, filled with the astounding noise of boiling water, really
believing that the immense waves which came hurtling towards us with
solid, sharp, transparent ridges, out of which the wind tore lumps of
water and flung them through the rigging of the ship, must overwhelm
the vessel before she could rise to it.

The fury of the tempest and the violence of the sea, which the boldest
could not contemplate without feeling that the ship was every moment in
more or less peril, kept the crew subdued, and they eat as best they
could the provisions without complaint. However, it needed nothing
less than a storm to keep them quiet; for on the second day a sea
extinguished the galley-fire, and until the gale abated no cooking
could be done; so that the men had to put up with cold water and
biscuit. Hence all hands were thrown upon the ship's bread for two
days, and the badness of it, therefore was made even more apparent than
heretofore, when its wormy mouldiness was in some degree qualified by
the nauseousness of bad salt pork and beef, and the sickly flavour of
damaged tea.

As I had anticipated, the captain came round a little a few hours
after his insulting attack upon me. I think his temper frightened
him when it had reference to me. Like others of his breed, he was a
bit of a cur at bottom: my character was a trifle beyond him, and he
was ignorant enough to hate and fear what he could not understand.
Be this as it may, he made some rough attempts at a rude kind of
politeness when I went below to get some grog, and condescended to say
that when I had been to sea as long as he, I would know that the most
ungrateful rascals in the world were sailors; that every crew he had
sailed with had always taken care to invent some grievance to growl
over--either the provisions were bad, or the work too heavy, or the
ship unseaworthy--and that long ago he had made up his mind never to
pay attention to their complaints, since no sooner would one wrong be
redressed, than another would be coined and shoved under his nose.

I took this opportunity of assuring him that I had never willingly
listened to the complaints of the men, and that I was always annoyed
when they spoke to me about the provisions, as I had nothing whatever
to do with that matter; and that so far from my wishing to stir up
the men into rebellion, my conduct had been uniformly influenced by
the desire to conciliate them and represent their condition as very
tolerable, so as to repress any tendency to disaffection which they
might foment among themselves.

To this he made no reply, and soon afterwards we parted; but all next
day he was sullen again, and never addressed me save to give an order.

On the evening of the third day the gale broke; the glass had risen
since the morning, but until the first dog-watch the wind did not bate
one iota of its violence, and the horizon still retained its stormy
and threatening aspect. The clouds then broke in the west, and the
setting sun shone forth with deep crimson light upon the wilderness of
mountainous waters. The wind fell quickly, then went round to the west,
and blew freshly; but there was a remarkable softness and sweetness in
the feel and taste of it. A couple of reefs were at once shaken out of
the main-topsail, and sail made. By midnight the heavy sea had subsided
into a deep, long, rolling swell, still strangely enough coming from
the south; but the fresh westerly wind held the ship steady, and for
the first time for nearly a hundred hours we were able to move about
the decks with comparative comfort. Early next morning the watch were
set to wash down and clear up the decks, and when I left my cabin at
eight o'clock, I found the weather bright and warm, with a blue sky
shining among heavy, white, April-looking clouds, and the ship making
seven knots under all plain sail. The decks were dry and comfortable,
and the ship had a habitable and civilized look by reason of the row of
clothes hung by the seamen to dry on the forecastle.

It was half-past nine o'clock, and I was standing near the taffrail
looking at a shoal of porpoises playing some few hundreds of feet
astern, when the man who was steering asked me to look in the direction
to which he pointed, that was, a little to the right of the bowsprit,
and say if there was anything to be seen there; for he had caught sight
of something black upon the horizon twice, but could not detect it now.

I turned my eyes towards the quarter of the sea indicated, but could
discern nothing whatever; and, telling him that what he had seen was
probably a wave which, standing higher than its fellows, will sometimes
show black a long distance off, walked to the fore part of the poop.

The breeze still held good and the vessel was slipping easily through
the water, though the southerly swell made her roll, and at times shook
the wind out of the sails. The skipper had gone to lie down, being
pretty well exhausted, I dare say, for he had kept the deck for the
greater part of three nights running. Duckling was also below. Most of
my watch were on the forecastle, sitting or lying in the sun, which
shone very warm upon the decks; the hens under the long-boat were
chattering briskly, and the cocks crowing and the pigs grunting with
the comfort of the warmth.

Suddenly, as the ship rose, I distinctly beheld something black out
away upon the horizon, showing just under the foot of the foresail.
It vanished instantly; but I was now satisfied, and went for the glass
which lay upon brackets just under the companion. I then told the man
who was steering to keep her away a couple of points for a few moments,
and resting the glass against the mizzen-royal backstay, pointed it
towards the place where I had seen the black object.

For some moments nothing but sea or sky filled the field of the glass
as the ship rose and fell; but all at once there leaped into this
field the hull of a ship, deep as her main-chains in the water, which
came and went before my eye as the long seas lifted or dropped in the
foreground. I managed to keep her sufficiently long in view to perceive
that she was totally dismasted.

"It's a wreck," said I, turning to the man; "let her come to again and
luff a point. There may be living creatures aboard of her."

Knowing what sort of man Captain Coxon was, I do not think that I
should have had the hardihood to luff the ship a point out of her
course had it involved the bracing of the yards; for the songs of the
men would certainly have brought him on deck, and I might have provoked
some ugly insolence. But the ship was going free, and would head more
westerly without occasioning further change than slightly slackening
the weather braces of the upper yards. This I did quietly, and the
dismasted hull was brought right dead on end with our flying jib-boom.
The men now caught sight of her, and began to stare and point, but did
not sing out as they saw by the telescope in my hand that I perceived
her. The breeze unhappily began to slacken somewhat, owing perhaps to
the gathering heat of the sun; our pace fell off, and a full hour
passed before we brought the wreck near enough to see her permanently,
for up to this she had been constantly vanishing under the rise of the
swell. She was now about two miles off, and I took a long and steady
look at her through the telescope. It was a black hull, with painted
ports. The deck was flush fore and aft, and there was a good-sized
house just before where the mainmast should have been. This house was
uninjured, though the galley was split up and to starboard stood up in
splinters like the stump of a tree struck by lightning. No boats could
be seen aboard of her. Her jib-boom was gone, and so were all three
masts, clean cut off at the deck, as though a hand-saw had done it; but
the mizzen-mast was alongside, held by the shrouds and backstays, and
the port main and fore shrouds streamed like serpents from her chains
into the water. I reckoned at once that she must be loaded with timber,
for she never could keep afloat at that depth with any other kind of
cargo in her.

She made a most mournful and piteous object in the sunlight, sluggishly
rolling to the swell which ran in transparent volumes over her sides
and foamed around the deck-house. Once, when her stern rose, I read the
name _Cecilia_ in broad white letters.

I was gazing at her intently in the effort to witness some indication
of living thing on board, when, to my mingled consternation and horror,
I witnessed an arm project through the window of the deck-house, and
frantically wave what resembled a white handkerchief. As none of the
men called out, I judged this signal was not perceptible to the naked
eye, and in my excitement I shouted--

"There's a living man on board of her, my lads!" dropped the glass,
and ran aft to call the captain.

I met him coming up the companion-ladder. The first thing he said was,
"You're out of your course," and looked up at the sails.

"There's a wreck yonder!" I cried, pointing eagerly, "with a man on
board signalling to us."

"Get me the glass," he said sulkily, and I picked it up, and gave it to
him.

He looked at the wreck for some moments, and addressing the man at the
wheel, exclaimed, making a movement with his hand--

"Keep her away. Where the devil are you steering to?"

"Good Heaven!" I ejaculated; "there's a man on board--there may be
others!"

"Damnation!" he exclaimed, between his teeth; "what do you mean by
interfering with me? Keep her away!" he roared out.

During this time we had drawn sufficiently near to the wreck to enable
the sharper-sighted among the hands to remark the signal; and they were
calling out that there was somebody flying a handkerchief aboard the
hull.

"Captain Coxon," said I, in as firm a voice as I could command--for I
was nearly in as great a rage as he, and rendered insensible to all
consequences by his inhumanity--"if you bear away, and leave that man
yonder to sink with that wreck, when he can be saved with very little
trouble, you will become as much a murderer as any ruffian who stabs a
man asleep."

When I had said this, Coxon turned black in the face with passion.
His eyes protruded, his hands and fingers worked as though he were
under some electrical process, and I saw for the first time in all my
life, a sight I had always laughed at as a bit of impossible novelist
description--a mouth foaming with rage. He rushed aft just over
Duckling's cabin, and stamped with all his might.

"Now," thought I, "they may try to murder me!" And without a word, I
pulled off my coat, seized a belaying-pin, and stood ready, resolved
that, happen what might, I would give the first man who should lay his
fingers on me something to remember me by whilst he had breath in his
body.

The men, not quite understanding what was happening, but seeing that
a "row" was taking place, came off the forecastle, and advanced by
degrees along the main-deck. Among them I noticed the cook, muttering
to one or the other who stood near.

Mr. Duckling, awakened by the violent clattering over his head, came
running up the companion with a bewildered, sleepy look in his face.
The captain grasped him by the arm, and pointing to me, cried out with
an oath, "that that villain was breeding a mutiny on board, and, he
believed, wanted to murder him and Duckling."

I at once answered, "Nothing of the kind! There is a man miserably
perishing on board that sinking wreck, Mr. Duckling, and he ought to
be saved. My lads!" I cried, addressing the men on the main-deck, "is
there a sailor among you all who would have the heart to leave that man
yonder without an effort to rescue him?"

"No, sir!" shouted one of them. "We'll save the man, and if the skipper
refuses we'll make him!"

"Luff!" I called to the man at the wheel.

"Luff, at your peril!" screamed the skipper.

"Aft here, some hands," I cried, "and lay the main-yard aback. Let go
the port-main braces!"

The captain came running towards me.

"By the living God!" I cried, in a fury, grasping the heavy brass
belaying-pin, "if you come within a foot of me, Captain Coxon, I'll
dash your brains out!"

My attitude, my enraged face and menacing gesture, produced the desired
effect. He stopped dead, turned a ghastly white, and looked round at
Duckling.

"What do you mean by this (etc.) conduct, you (etc.) mutinous
scoundrel!" roared Duckling, with a volley of foul language.

"Give him one for himself if he says too much, Mr. Royle!" sung out
some hoarse voice on the main-deck, "we'll back yer!" And then came
cries of "They're a cursed pair o' murderers!" "Who run the smack
down?" "Who lets men drown?" "Who starves honest men?" This last
exclamation was followed by a roar.

The whole of the crew were now on deck, having been aroused by our
voices. Some of them were looking on with a grin; others with an
expression of fierce curiosity. It was at once understood that I was
making a stand against the captain and chief mate, and a single glance
at them assured me that by one word I could set the whole of them on
fire to do my bidding even to shedding blood.

In the mean time the man at the wheel had luffed until the weather
leeches were flat and the ship scarcely moving. And at this moment,
that the skipper might know their meaning, a couple of hands jumped
aft and let go the weather main-braces. I took care to keep my eyes
on Coxon and the mate, fully prepared for any attack that one or both
might make on me. Duckling eyed me furiously, but in silence, evidently
baffled by my resolute air and the posture of the men. Then he said
something to the captain, who looked exhausted and white and haggard
with his useless passion. They walked over to the lee-side of the poop,
and after a short conference the captain, to my surprise, went below,
and Duckling came forward.

"There's no objection," he said, "to your saving the man's life, if you
want. Lower away the starboard quarter-boat, and you go along in her,"
he added to me, uttering the last words in such a thick voice that I
thought he was choking.

"Come along, some of you," I cried out, hastily putting on my coat; and
in less than a minute I was in the boat with the rudder and thole-pins
shipped and four hands ready to out oars as soon as we touched the
water.

Duckling began to fumble at one of the boat's falls.

"Don't let him lower away!" roared out one of the men in the boat.
"He'll let us go with a run. He'd like to see us drownded."

Duckling fell back scowling with fury, and, shoving his head over
as the boat sank quietly into the water, he discharged a volley of
execrations at us, saying that he would shoot some of us, if he swung
for it, before he was done; and especially applying a heap of abusive
terms to me.

The fellow pulling the bow oar laughed in his face, and another shouted
out, "We'll teach you to say your prayers yet, you ugly old sinner!"

We got away from the ship's side cleverly, and in a short time were
rowing fast for the wreck. The excitement under which I laboured made
me reckless of the issue of this adventure. The sight of the lonely man
upon the wreck, coupled with the unmanly, brutal intention of Coxon to
leave him to his fate, had goaded me into a state of mind infuriate
enough to have done and dared everything to _compel_ Coxon to save him.
He might call it mutiny, but I called it humanity, and I was prepared
to stand or fall by my theory. The hate the crew had for their captain
and chief mate was quite strong enough to guarantee me against any foul
play on the part of Coxon, otherwise I might have prepared myself to
see the ship fill and stand away and leave us alone on the sea with
the wreck. One of the men in the boat suggested this; but another
immediately answered: "They'd pitch the skipper overboard if he gave
such an order, and glad o' the chance. There's no love for 'em among
us, I can tell you, and by ---- there'll be bloody work done aboard the
_Grosvenor_ if things aren't mended soon, as you'll see."

They all four pulled at their oars savagely as these words were spoken,
and I never saw such sullen and ferocious expressions on men's faces as
came into theirs when they fixed their eyes as with one accord upon the
ship.

_She_, deep as she was, looked a beautiful model on the mighty surface
of the water, rolling with marvellous grace to the swell, the strength
and volume of which made me feel my littleness and weakness as it
lifted the small boat with irresistible power. There was wind enough
to keep her sails full upon her graceful, slender masts, and the
brass-work upon her deck flashed brilliantly as she rolled from side to
side.

Strange contrast to look from her to the broken and desolate picture
ahead! My eyes were rivetted upon it now with new and intense emotion,
for by this time I could discern that the person who was waving to us
was a female--woman or girl I could not yet make out--and that her hair
was like a veil of gold behind her swaying arm.

"It's a woman!" I cried in my excitement; "it's no man at all. Pull
smartly, my lads, pull smartly, for God's sake!"

The men gave way stoutly, and the swell favouring us, we were soon
close to the wreck. The girl, as I now perceived she was, waved her
handkerchief wildly as we approached; but my attention was occupied
in considering how we could best board the wreck without injury to
the boat. She lay broadside to us, with her stern on our right, and
was not only rolling heavily with wallowing, squelching movements,
but was swirling the heavy mizzen-mast that lay alongside through the
water each time she went over to starboard, so that it was necessary
to approach her with the greatest caution to prevent our boat from
being stove in. Another element of danger was the great flood of water
which she took in over her shattered bulwarks, first on this side, then
on that, discharging the torrent again into the sea according as she
rolled. This water came from her like a cataract, and in a second would
fill and sink the boat unless extreme care were taken to keep clear of
it.

I waved my hat to the poor girl to let her know that we saw her and had
come to save her, and steered the boat right around the wreck that I
might observe the most practicable point for boarding her.

She appeared to be a vessel of about 700 tons. The falling of her
masts had crushed her port bulwarks level with the deck, and part of
her starboard bulwarks was also smashed to pieces. Her wheel was gone,
and the heavy seas that had swept her deck had carried away capstans,
binnacle, hatchway gratings, pumps--everything, in short, but the
deck-house and the remnants of the galley. I particularly noticed a
strong iron boat's davit twisted up like a corkscrew. She was full of
water, and lay as deep as her main-chains, but her bows stood high, and
her fore-chains were out of the sea. It was miraculous to see her keep
afloat as the long swell rolled over her in a cruel, foaming succession
of waves.

Though these plain details impressed themselves upon my memory, I
did not seem to notice anything, in the anxiety that possessed me
to rescue the lonely creature in the deck-house. It would have been
impossible to keep a footing upon the main-deck without a life-line
or something to hold on by; and seeing this and forming my resolutions
rapidly, I ordered the man in the bows of the boat to throw in his
oar and exchange places with me, and head the boat for the starboard
port-chains. As we approached I stood up with one foot planted on the
gunwale ready to spring; the broken shrouds were streaming aft and
alongside, so that if I missed the jump and fell into the water there
was plenty of stuff to catch hold of.

"Gently--'vast rowing--ready to back astern smartly!" I cried, as we
approached. I waited a moment: the hull rolled towards us, and the
succeeding swell threw up our boat; the deck, though all aslant, was on
a line with my feet. I sprang with all my strength, and got well upon
the deck, but fell heavily as I reached it. However, I was up again in
a moment, and ran forward out of the wash of the water.

Here was a heap of gear, staysail and jib-halliards and other ropes,
some of the ends swarming overboard. I hauled in one of these ends,
but found I could not clear the raffle; but looking round, I perceived
a couple of coils of line, spare stun'-sail tacks or halliards I took
them to be, lying close against the foot of the bowsprit. I immediately
seized the end of one of these coils and flung it into the boat,
telling them to drop clear of the wreck astern; and when they had
backed as far as the length of line permitted, I bent on the end of the
other coil and paid that out until the boat was some fathoms astern.
I then made my end fast, and sung out to one of the men to get on
board by the starboard mizzen-chains and to bring the end of the line
with him. After waiting a few minutes, the boat being hidden, I saw
the fellow come scrambling over the side with a red face, his clothes
and hair streaming, he having fallen overboard. He shook himself like
a dog, and crawled with the line, on his hands and knees, a short
distance forward, then hauled the line taut and made it fast.

"Tell them to bring the boat round here," I cried, "and lay off on
their oars until we are ready. And you get hold of this line and work
yourself up to me."

Saying which I advanced along the deck, clinging tightly with both
hands. It very providentially happened that the door of the deck-house
faced the forecastle within a few feet of where the remains of the
galley stood. There would be, therefore, less risk in opening it than
had it faced beam-wise; for the water, as it broke against the sides of
the house, disparted clear of the fore and after parts; that is, the
great bulk of it ran clear, though, of course, a foot's depth of it at
least surged against the door.

I called out to the girl to open the door quickly, as it slided in
grooves like a panel, and was not to be stirred from the outside. The
poor creature appeared mad, and I repeated my request three times
without inducing her to leave the window. Then, not believing that she
understood me, I cried out, "Are you English?"

"Yes," she replied. "For God's sake, save us!"

"I cannot get you through that window," I exclaimed. "Rouse yourself
and open that door, and I will save you."

She now seemed to comprehend, and drew in her head. By this time the
man out of the boat had succeeded in sliding along the rope to where
I stood, though the poor devil was nearly drowned on the road; for
when about half-way the hull took in a lump of a swell which swept
him right off his legs, and he was swung hard a-starboard, holding on
for his life. However, he recovered himself smartly when the water was
gone, and came along hand over fist, snorting and cursing in wonderful
style.

Meanwhile, though I kept firm hold of the life-line, I took care to
stand where the inroads of water were not heavy, waiting impatiently
for the door to open. It shook in the grooves, tried by a feeble hand;
then a desperate effort was made, and it slid a couple of inches.

"That will do!" I shouted. "Now, then, my lad, catch hold of me with
one hand and the line with the other."

The fellow took a firm grip of my monkey-jacket, and I made for the
door. The water washed up to my knees, but I soon inserted my fingers
in the crevice of the door and thrust it open.

The house was a single compartment, though I had expected to find
it divided into two. In the centre was a table that travelled on
stanchions from the roof to the deck. On either side were a couple of
bunks. The girl stood near the door. In a bunk to the left of the door
lay an old man with white hair. Prostrate on his back, on the deck,
with his arms stretched against his ears, was the corpse of a man, well
dressed; and in a bunk on the right sat a sailor, who, when he saw me,
yelled out and snapped his fingers, making horrible grimaces.

Such in brief the _coup d'oeil_ of that weird interior as it met my
eyes.

I seized the girl by the arm.

"You first," said I. "Come--there is no time to be lost."

But she shrank back, pressing against the door with her hand to prevent
me from pulling her, crying in a husky voice, and looking at the old
man with the white hair. "My father first!--my father first!"

"You shall all be saved, but you must obey me. Quickly now!" I
exclaimed passionately, for a heavy sea at that moment flooded the
ship, and a rush of water swamped the house through the open door, and
washed the corpse on the deck up into a corner.

Grasping her firmly, I lifted her off her feet, and went staggering
to the life-rope, slinging her light body over my shoulder as I went.
Assisted by my man, I gained the bow of the wreck, and, hailing the
boat, ordered it alongside.

"One of you," cried I, "stand ready to receive this lady when I give
the signal."

I then told the man who was with me to jump into the fore-chains, which
he instantly did. The wreck lurched heavily to port. "Stand by, my
lads!" I shouted. Over she came again, with the water swooping along
the main-deck. The boat rose high, and the fore-chains were submerged
to the height of the man's knees. "Now!" I called, and lifted the girl
over. She was seized by the man in the chains and pushed towards the
boat; the fellow standing in the bow of the boat caught her, and at the
same moment down sank the boat, and the wreck rolled wearily over. But
the girl was safe.

"Hurrah, my lad!" I sung out. "Up with you--there are others
remaining;" and I went sprawling along the line to the deck-house,
there to encounter another rush of water, which washed as high as my
thighs, and fetched me such a thump in the stomach, that I thought I
must have died of suffocation.

I was glad to find that the old man had got out of his bunk and was
standing at the door.

"Is my poor girl safe, sir?" he exclaimed, with the same huskiness of
voice that had grated so unpleasantly in the girl's tone.

"Quite safe--come along."

"Thanks be to Almighty God!" he ejaculated, and burst into tears.

I seized hold of his thin, cold hand, but shifted my fingers to catch
him by the coat collar, so as to exert more power over him, and hauled
him along the deck, telling my companion to lay hold of the seaman and
fetch him away smartly. We managed to escape the water, for the poor
old gentleman bestirred himself very nimbly, and I helped him over
the fore-chains, and when the boat rose, tumbled him into her without
ceremony. I saw the daughter leap towards him and clasp him in her
arms, but I was soon again scrambling on to the deck, having heard
cries from my man, accompanied with several loud curses, mingled with
dreadful yells.

"He's bitten me, sir!" cried my companion, hauling himself away from
the deck-house. "He's roaring mad."

"It can't be helped," I answered. "We must get him out."

He saw me pushing along the life-line, plucked up heart, and went with
myself through a sousing sea to the door. I caught a glimpse of a white
face glaring at me from the interior: in a second a figure shot out,
fled with incredible speed towards the bow, and leaped into the sea
just where our boat lay.

"They'll pick him up," I exclaimed. "Stop a second;" and I entered the
house and stooped over the figure of the man on the deck. I was not
familiar with death, and yet I knew it was here. I cannot describe
the signs in his face; but such as they were they told me the truth.
I noticed a ring upon his finger, and that his clothes were good. His
hair was black, and his features well-shaped, though his face had a
half-convulsed expression, as if something frightful had appeared to
him, and he had died of the sight of it.

"This wreck must be his coffin," I said. "He is a corpse. We can do no
more."

We scrambled for the last time along the life-line and got into the
fore-chains, but to our consternation saw the boat rowing away from
the wreck. However, the fit of rage and terror that possessed me,
lasted but a moment or two; for I now saw they were giving chase to
the madman, who was swimming steadily away. Two of the men rowed, and
the third hung over the bows, ready to grasp the miserable wretch.
The _Grosvenor_ stood steady, about a mile off, with her mainyards
backed; and just as the fellow over the boat's bows caught hold of the
swimmer's hair, the ensign was run up on board the ship and dipped
three times.

"Bring him along!" I shouted. "They'll be off without us if we don't
bear a hand."

They nearly capsized the boat as they dragged the lunatic, streaming
like a drowned rat, out of the water; and one of the sailors tumbled
him over on his back, and knelt upon him, whilst he took some turns
with the boat's painter round his body, arms, and legs. The boat then
came alongside, and, watching our opportunity, we jumped into her and
shoved off.

I had now leisure to examine the persons whom we had saved.

They--father and daughter as I judged them, by the girl's exclamation
on the wreck--sat in the stern-sheets, their hands locked. The old man
seemed nearly insensible, leaning backwards with his chin on his breast
and his eyes partially closed. I feared he was dying, but could do no
good until we reached the _Grosvenor_, as we had no spirits in the boat.

The girl appeared to be about twenty years of age, very fair, her hair
of a golden straw colour, which hung wet and streaky down her back and
over her shoulders, though a portion of it was held by a comb. She was
deadly pale and her lips blue, and in her fine eyes was such a look of
mingled horror and rapture as she cast them around her, first glancing
at me, then at the wreck, then at the _Grosvenor_, that the memory of
it will last me to my death. Her dress, of some dark material, was
soaked with salt water up to her hips, and she shivered and moaned
incessantly, though the sun beat so warmly upon us that the thwarts
were hot to the hand.

The mad sailor lay at the bottom of the boat, looking straight into
the sky. He was a horrid-looking object with his streaming hair, pasty
features, and red beard; his naked shanks and feet protruding through
his soaking, clinging trousers, which figured his shin-bones as though
they clothed a skeleton. Now and again he would give himself a wild
twirl and yelp out fiercely; but he was well-nigh spent with his swim,
and on the whole was quiet enough.

I said to the girl, "How long have you been in this dreadful position?"

"Since yesterday morning," she answered in a choking voice painful to
hear, and gulping after each word. "We have not had a drop of water to
drink since the night before last. He is mad with thirst, for he drank
the water on the deck," and she pointed to the man in the bottom of the
boat.

"My God!" I cried to the men; "do you hear her? They have not drunk
water for two days! For the love of God, give way!"

They bent their backs to the oars and the boat foamed over the long
swell. The wind was astern and helped us. I did not speak again to the
poor girl, for it was cruel to make her talk when the words lacerated
her throat as though they were pieces of burning iron.

After twenty minutes, which seemed as many hours, we reached the
vessel. The crew pressing round the gangway cheered when they saw we
had brought people from the wreck. Duckling and the skipper watched us
grimly from the poop.

"Now then, my lads," I cried, "up with this lady first. Some of you on
deck get water ready, as these people are dying of thirst."

In a few moments both the girl and the old man were handed over the
gangway. I cut the boat's painter adrift from the ring-bolt so that we
could ship the madman without loosening his bonds, and he was hoisted
up like a bale of goods. Then four of us got out of the boat, leaving
one to drop her under the davits and hook on the falls.

At this moment a horrible scene took place.

The old man, tottering on the arms of two seamen, was being led into
the cuddy, followed by the girl, who walked unaided. The madman, in the
grasp of the big sailor named Johnson, stood near the gangway, and as I
scrambled on deck one of the men was holding a pannikin full of water
to his face. The poor wretch was shrinking away from it, with his eyes
half out of their sockets; but suddenly tearing his arm with a violent
effort from the rope that bound him, he seized the pannikin _and
bit clean through the tin_; after which, throwing back his head, he
swallowed the whole draught, dashed the pannikin down, his face turned
black, and he fell dead on the deck.

The big sailor sprang aside with an oath, forced from him by his
terror, and from every looker-on there broke a groan. They all shrank
away and stood staring with blanched faces. Such a piteous sight as it
was, lying doubled up, with the rope pinioning the miserable limbs, the
teeth locked, and the right arm up-tossed!

"Aft here and get the quarter-boat hoisted up!" shouted Duckling,
advancing on the poop; and seeing the man dead on the deck, he added,
"Get a tarpaulin and cover him up, and let him lie on the fore-hatch."

"Shall I tell the steward to serve out grog to the men who went with
me?" I asked him.

He stared at me contemptuously, and walked away without answering.

"You shall have your grog," said I, addressing one of them who stood
near, "though it should be my own allowance." And thoroughly exhausted
after my exertions, and wet through, I turned into my cabin to put on
some dry clothes.




CHAPTER VIII.


Whilst I was in my cabin I heard the men hoisting up the quarter-boat,
and this was followed by an order from Duckling to man the lee
main-braces. The ship, hove too, was off her course; but when she
filled, she brought the wreck right abreast of the port-hole in my
cabin. I stood watching for some minutes with peculiar emotions,
for the recollection of the dead body in the deck-house lent a most
impressive significance to the mournful object which rolled from side
to side. It comforted me, however, to reflect that it was impossible I
could have left anything living on the hull, since nothing could have
existed below the deck, and any one above must have been seen by me.

The ship, now lying over, shut the wreck out, and I shifted my clothes
as speedily as I could, being anxious to hear what Captain Coxon should
say to me. I was also curious to see the old man and girl, and learn
what treatment the captain was showing them. I remember it struck me,
just at this time, that the girl was in a very awkward position; for
here she was on board a vessel without any female to serve her for a
companion and lend her clothes, which she would stand seriously in need
of, as those she had on her were wringing wet. And even supposing she
could make shift with these for a time, she would soon want a change of
apparel, which she certainly would not get until we reached Valparaiso,
unless the skipper put into some port and landed them. The memory of
her refined and pretty face, with the amber air about it, and her wild,
soft, piteous blue eyes, haunted me; and I tried to think what could
be done to make her comfortable in this matter of dress if the captain
refused to go out of his way to set them ashore.

Thus thinking, I was pulling on a boot, when there came an awkward
knock at the door of the cabin, and in stepped the carpenter, Stevens
by name, holding in his hand a bar of iron with a collar at either end,
and one collar fastened with a padlock. Close behind the carpenter came
Duckling, who let the door close of itself, and who immediately said--

"Captain Coxon's orders are to put you in irons. Carpenter, clap those
belayers on his damned shins."

I jumped off the chest on which I was seated, not with the intention of
resisting, but of remonstrating; but Duckling, mistaking the action,
drew a pistol out of his side-pocket, and presenting it at my head,
said, right through his nose, which was the first time I had heard him
so speak: "By the Etarnal! if you don't let the carpenter do his work,
I'll shoot you dead--so mind!"

"You're a ruffian and a bully!" said I; "but I'll keep my life if only
to punish you and your master!"

Saying which, I reseated myself, folded my arms resolutely, and
suffered the carpenter to lock the irons on my ankles, keeping my eyes
fixed on Duckling with an expression of the utmost scorn and dislike in
them.

"Now," said he, "you infernal mutinous hound! I reckon you'll not give
us much trouble for the rest of the voyage."

This injurious language was more than my temper could brook. Scarcely
knowing what I did, I threw myself against him, caught his throat, and
dashed him violently down upon the deck. The pistol exploded in his
hand as he fell.

"Carpenter," I cried furiously, "open that door!"

The fellow obeyed me instantly, and walked out of the cabin. Duckling
lay pretty well stunned upon the deck; but in a few moments he would
have been up and at me, and, hampered as I was by the irons, he must
have mastered me easily. I shambled over to where he lay, dragged him
upright, and pitched him with a crash through the open door against
the cuddy table. He struck it heavily and rolled under it, and I then
slammed the door and sat down, feeling faint and quite exhausted of
breath.

The door had not been closed two minutes when it was partially opened,
and a friendly hand (the boatswain's, as I afterwards learnt) placed
a pannikin of rum-and-water on the deck, and a voice said, "They'll
not let you be here long, sir." The door was then shut again; and very
thankful for a refreshment of which I stood seriously in need, I got
hold of the pannikin and swallowed the contents.

I now tried to reflect upon my situation, but found it impossible to do
so, as I could not guess what intentions the captain had against me and
what would be the result of my conflict with Duckling. For some while I
sat expecting to see the chief mate rush in on me; and, in anticipation
of a struggle with a coward who would have me almost at his mercy, I
laid hold of a sea-boot, very heavy, with an iron-shod heel, and held
it ready to strike at the bully's head should he enter. However, in
about a quarter of an hour's time I saw him through my cabin window
pass along the main-deck, with a blue lump over his right eye, while
the rest of his face shone with soap, which he must have used without
stint to rid his features of the blood that had smeared them. Whether
the report of the pistol had been heard or not I could not tell; but no
notice appeared to be taken of it. I noticed a number of the crew just
under the forecastle conversing in a very earnest manner, and sometimes
looking towards my cabin.

There was something very gross and brutal in this treatment to which
I was subjected, and there was a contempt in it for me, suggested by
the skipper sending Duckling to see me in irons, instead of logging
me to my face and acting in a shipshape fashion in putting me under
arrest, which galled me extremely. The very irons on my legs were not
such as are ordinarily used on board ship, and looked as if they had
been picked up cheap in some rag and slop shop in South America or
in the West Indies, for I think I had seen such things in pictures
of truculent negro slaves. I was in some measure supported by the
reflection that the crew sympathized with me, and would not suffer me
to be cruelly used; but the idea of a mutiny among them gave me no
pleasure, for the skipper was sure to swear that I was the ringleader,
and Duckling would of course back his statements; and my calling upon
the men to help me to put off to the wreck, against the captain's
orders, my going thither, and my confinement in irons, would all tell
heavily against me in any court of inquiry; so that, as things were, I
not only stood the chance of being professionally ruined, but of having
to undergo a term of imprisonment ashore.

These were no very agreeable reflections; and if some rather desperate
thoughts came into my head whilst I sat pondering over my misfortunes,
the reader will not greatly wonder.

I was growing rather faint with hunger, for it was past my usual
dinner-hour, and I had done enough work to account for a good appetite.

The captain was eating his dinner in the cuddy; for I not only smelt
the cooking, but heard his voice addressing the steward, who was,
perhaps, the only man in the ship who showed any kind of liking for
him. I tried to hear if the old man or the girl were with him, but
caught no other voice. I honestly prayed that the captain would act
humanely towards them; but I had my doubts, for he was certainly a
cold-blooded, selfish rascal.

By-and-by I heard Duckling's voice, showing that the captain had gone
on deck. This man, either wanting the tact of his superior or hating me
more bitterly (which I admit was fair, seeing how I had punished him),
said in a loud voice to the steward--

"What fodder is that mutinous dog yonder to have?"

The steward spoke low and I did not hear him.

"Serve the skunk right," continued the chief mate. "By glory, if there
was only a pair of handcuffs on board they should be on him. How's this
lump?"

The steward replied, and Mr. Duckling continued--

"I guess the fellow at the wheel grinned when he saw it. But I'll be
raising bigger lumps than this on some of 'em before I'm done. This is
the most skulking, snivelling, mutinous ship's crew that ever I sailed
with--I'd rather work the vessel with four Lascars; and as to that rat
in the hole there, if it wasn't for the colour of the bunting we sail
under, I reckon we'd have made an ensign of him at the mizzen-peak
some days ago, by the Lord, with the signal halliards round his neck,
for he's born to be hanged; and I guess, though he knocked me down when
I wasn't looking, I'm strong enough to hoist _him_ thirty feet, and let
him drop with a run."

All this was said in a loud voice for my edification, but I must own it
did not frighten me very greatly. To speak the truth, I thought more
of the old man and his daughter than myself; for if they should hear
this bragging bully from their cabins, they would form very alarming
conclusions as to the character of the persons who had rescued them,
and scarcely know, indeed, whether we were not all cut-throats.

Shortly after this, Duckling came out on to the main-deck, and
observing me looking through the window, bawled at the top of his voice
for the carpenter, who presently came, and Duckling, pointing to my
window, gave him some instructions, which he went away to execute. A
young ordinary seaman--an Irish lad named Driscoll--was coiling a rope
over one of the belaying-pins around the mainmast. Duckling pointed up
aloft, and his voice sounded, though I did not hear the order. The lad
waited to coil the rest of the rope--a fathom or so--before obeying:
whereupon Duckling hit him a blow on the back, slewed him round, caught
him by the throat, and backed him savagely against the starboard
bulwarks, roaring, in language quite audible to me now--"Up with you,
you skulker! I'll teach you to wait when I give an order. Up with you,
I say, or I'll pound you to pieces."

At this moment the carpenter approached my window, provided with a
hammer and a couple of planks, which he proceeded to nail upon the
framework. Duckling watched him with a grin upon his ugly face, the
lump over his eye not improving the expression, as you may believe.
I was now in comparative darkness; for the port-hole admitted but
little light, and, unlike the rest of the cuddy berths, my cabin had no
bull's-eye.

I reached the door with a great deal of trouble, for the iron-bar
hampered my movements excessively, and found it locked outside; but by
whom and when I did not know, for I had not heard the key turned. But
I might depend that Duckling had done this with cat-like stealthiness,
and that he probably had the key in his pocket.

I was hungry enough to have felt grateful for a biscuit, and had half
a mind to sing out to the steward to bring me something to eat, but
reflected that my doing so might only provoke an insulting answer from
the fellow. With some difficulty I pulled the mattress out of the cot
and put it into the bunk, as my pinioned legs would not enable me to
climb or spring, and laid down and presently fell asleep.

I slept away the greater part of the afternoon; for when I awoke, the
sky, as I saw it through the port-hole, was dark with the shadow of
evening. A strong wind was blowing and the ship laying heavily over to
it, by which I might know she was carrying a heap of canvas.

I looked over the edge of the bunk, and saw on the deck near the door
a tin dish, containing some common ship's biscuit and a can of cold
water. I was so hungry that I jumped up eagerly to get the biscuit, by
doing which I so tweaked my ankles with the irons, that the blood came
from the broken skin. I made shift to reach the biscuit, which proved
to be the ship's bread as served to the men, and ate greedily, being
indeed famished; but speedily discovered the substantial grounds of
complaint the sailors had against the ship's stores; for the biscuit
was intolerably mouldy and rotten, and so full of weevils, that
nothing but hunger could have induced me to swallow the abomination.
I managed to devour a couple of these things, and drank some water;
and then pulled out my pipe and began to smoke, caring little about
the skipper's objection to this indulgence in the saloon, and heartily
wishing he would come to the cabin that I might tell him what I thought
of his behaviour.

How long was this state of things going to last with me? Would the
crew compel Captain Coxon to put into some near port where I should
be handed over to the authorities, or would he proceed direct to
Valparaiso? The probability of his touching anywhere was, in my
opinion, now smaller than before; as the delays, and inquiry into my
conduct and the complaints of the men, would seriously enlarge the
period of the voyage. Nor could I imagine that the two persons we had
rescued would prevail upon him to go out of his way to land them. As
for myself, looking back on my actions, I did not believe that any
court would judge me severely for obliging Coxon to send a boat to
the wreck; for I had the evidence of the crew to prove that a human
being had been seen signalling to us for help, before I ordered the
ship to be hove to, and that therefore my determination to board the
wreck had not been speculative, but truly justified by the spectacle
of human distress. Still, such anticipations scarcely consoled me for
the inconvenience I suffered in my feet being held in irons, and in my
being locked up in a gloomy cabin, where such fare as I had already
eaten would probably be the food I should get until the voyage out was
ended.

As the evening advanced the wind freshened, and I heard the captain
giving orders just over my head, and the hands shortening sail. The
skipper was again straining the ship heavily: the creaking and groaning
in the cuddy was incessant: and every now and again I heard the boom of
a sea against the vessel's side, and the sousing rush of water on deck.
But after the men had been at work some time, the vessel laboured less
and got upon a more even keel.

Two bells (nine o'clock) had been struck, when I was suddenly attracted
by a sound of hammering upon the dead-light in my cabin. I turned my
head hastily; but as it was not only dark inside, but dark without, I
could discern nothing, and concluded that the noise had been made on
the deck overhead.

After an interval of a minute the hammering was repeated, and now it
was impossible for me to doubt that it was caused by something hard,
such as the handle of a knife being struck upon the thick glass of
the port-hole. I was greatly astonished; but remembering that the
main-chains extended away from this port-hole, I easily concluded that
some one had got down into them and was knocking to draw my attention.

I hoisted my legs out of the bunk with very great difficulty, and
having got my feet upon the deck, drew myself to the port-hole, but
with much trouble, it being to windward, and the deck sloping to a
considerable angle. Not a glimmer of light penetrated my cabin from the
cuddy: and whether the sky outside was clear or not, I only know that
the prospect seen through the port-hole, buried in the thickness of the
ship's wall, was pitch dark.

I untwisted the screw that kept the dead-light closed, and it blew
open, and a rush of wind, concentrated by the narrowness of the
aperture through which it penetrated, blew damp with spray upon my face.

Fearful of my voice being heard in the cuddy--for this was the hour
when the spirits were put upon the table, and it was quite likely that
Coxon or Duckling might be seated within, drinking alone--I muffled my
voice between my hands and asked who was there?

The fellow jammed his face so effectually into the port-hole as to
exclude the wind, so that the whisper in which he spoke was quite
distinct.

"Me--Stevens, the carpenter. I've come from the crew. But you're to
take your solemn oath you'll not split upon us if I tell you what's
goin' to happen?"

"I am not in a position to split," I replied. "But I can make no
promises until I know your intentions."

The man was a long time silent. Several times he withdrew his face, as
I knew (for I could not see him) by the rush of wind that came in, to
shake himself free of the spray that broke over him.

"It's just this," he said, bunging up the port-hole again. "We'd rather
take a twelvemonth imprisonment ashore, in the worst jail in England,
than work this wessel on the rotten food we're obliged to eat. What we
want to know is, will you take charge o' the ship and carry her where
we tells yer, if we give you command?"

I was too much startled by this question to reply at once. Influenced
by the long term of confinement before me, if Captain Coxon remained
in control, by my bitter dislike of him and his bully factotum, by
the longing to be free, and the hundred excuses I could frame for
co-operating with the crew, my first impulse was to say yes. But there
came quickly considerations of the danger of mutiny on board ship, of
the sure excesses of men made reckless by liberty and freed from the
discipline which, though their passions might protest against it, their
still stronger instincts admitted and obeyed.

"Give us your answer," said the man. "If the chief mate looks over,
he'll see me."

"I cannot consent," I replied. "I am as sorry for the crew as I am for
myself. But things are better as they are."

"By----!" exclaimed the man in a violent, hoarse whisper, "we don't
mean to let 'em be as they are. We've put up with a bit too much as it
is. We'll find a way of making you consent--see to that! And if you
peach on us we're still too strong for you--so mind your life!"

Saying which he withdrew his head; and after waiting a short time to
see if he remained, I closed the port, and shuffled into my bunk again.

I tried to think how I should act.

If I acquainted the captain with the carpenter's disclosure the men
would probably murder me. And though they withheld from bloodshed, my
putting the captain on his guard would not save the ship if the men
were determined to seize her, because he could not count on more than
two men to side with him, and the crew would overpower them immediately.

However, I will not seem more virtuous and upright than I was; and
I may therefore say, that after giving this matter some half-hour's
thinking, I found that it would suit my purpose better if the crew
mutinied than if the captain continued in charge, because it might
open large opportunities for my future, and relieve me from the
disgraceful position in which I was placed by the malice and injustice
of my two superiors. The one thing I heartily prayed for was that
murder might not be done; but I did not anticipate great violence, as I
imagined that the crew had no other object in rebelling than to compel
the captain to put into the nearest port to exchange the stores.

The night wore away very slowly, and I counted every bell that was
struck. The wind decreased at midnight, and I heard Duckling go into
the captain's cabin and rouse him up, the captain evidently having
undertaken my duties. Duckling reported the weather during his watch,
and said, "The wind is dropping, but it looks dirty to the south'ard.
If we lose the breeze we may get it fresh from t'other quarter, and
she can't hurt under easy sail until we see what's going to do."

They then went on deck together, and in about ten minutes' time
Duckling returned and went into his cabin, closing the door noisily.

A little after one o'clock I fell into a dose, but was shortly after
awakened by hearing the growl of voices close against my cabin, my
apprehensions making my hearing very sensitive, even in sleep.

In a few moments the voices of the men were silenced, and I then heard
the tread of footsteps in the cuddy going aft, and some one as he
passed tried the handle of my door.

Another long interval of silence followed; and as I did not hear
the men who had entered the cuddy return, I wondered where they had
stationed themselves, and what they were doing. As to myself, the irons
on my legs made me quite helpless.

The time that now passed seemed an eternity, and I was beginning to
wonder whether the voices I had heard might not have been Coxon's and
the steward's--all was so quiet--when a step sounded overhead, and
the captain's voice rang out, "Lay aft, some hands, and brail up the
spanker!"

Instantly several men ran up the starboard poop-ladder, proving that
they must have been stationed close against my cabin, and their heavy
feet clattered along the deck, and I heard their voices singing. Scarce
were their voices hushed when a shrill whistle, like a sharp human
squeal, was raised forwards, and immediately there was a sharp twirl
and scuffle of feet on the deck, followed by a groan and a fall. At the
same moment a door was forced open in the cuddy, and, as I might judge
by what followed, a body of men tumbled into the chief mate's cabin. A
growling and yelping of fierce human voices followed. "Haul him out of
it by the hair!"--"You blackguard! you'll show fight, will yer! Take
that for yourself!"--"Over the eyes next time, Bill! Let me get at
the----!"

But, as I imagined, the muscular, infuriate chief mate would not fall
an easy prey, fighting as he deemed for his life. I heard the thump of
bodies swung against the panelling, fierce execrations, the smash of
crockery, and the heavy breathing of men engaged in deadly conflict.

It was brief enough in reality, though Duckling seemed to find them
work for a good while.

"Don't kill him now! Wait till dere's plenty ob light!" howled a voice,
which I knew to be the cook's. And then they came along the cuddy,
dragging the body which they had either killed or knocked insensible
after them, and got upon the main-deck.

"Poop, ahoy!" shouted one of them. "What cheer up there, mates?"

"Right as a trivet!--ready to sling astern!" came the answer directly
over my head, followed by some laughter.

As I lay holding my breath, scarcely knowing what was next to befall,
the handle of my door was tried, the door pushed, then shaken
passionately, after which a voice, in tones which might have emanated
from a ghost, exclaimed--

"Mr. Royle, they have killed the captain and Mr. Duckling! For God
Almighty's sake, ask them to spare my life! They will listen to you,
sir! For God's sake, save me!"

"Who are you?" I answered.

"The steward, sir."

But as he said this one of the men on the quarter-deck shouted,
"Where's the steward? He's as bad as the others! He's the one what
swore the pork was sweet!"

And then I heard the steward steal swiftly away from my cabin door and
some men come into the cuddy. They would doubtless have hunted him down
there and then, but one of them unconsciously diverted the thoughts of
the others by exclaiming--

"There's the second mate in there. Let's have him out of it."

My cabin door was again tried, and a heavy kick administered.

"It's locked, can't you see?" said one of the men.

As it opened into the cuddy it was not to be forced, so one of them
exclaimed that he would fetch a mallet and a calking-iron, with which
he returned in less than a couple of minutes, and presently the lock
was smashed to pieces, and the door fell open.

Both swinging-lamps were alight in the cuddy, and one, being nearly
opposite my cabin, streamed fairly into it. I was seated erect in my
bunk when the men entered, and I immediately exclaimed, pointing to the
irons, "I am glad you have thought of me. Knock those things off, will
you?"

I believe there was something in the cool way in which I pronounced
these words that as fully persuaded them that I was intent upon the
mutiny as any action I could have committed.

"We'll not take long to do that for you," cried the fellow who held the
mallet (a formidable weapon, by the way, in such hands!). "Get upon
the deck, and I'll swaller this iron if you aren't able to dance a
breakdown in a jiffy!"

I dropped out of the bunk, and with two blows the man cut off the
staple, and I kicked the irons off.

"Now, my lads," said I, beginning to play the part I had made up my
mind to act whilst listening to the onslaught on the captain and
Duckling; "what have you done?"

The fellow who had knocked off the irons, and now answered me, was
named Cornish, a man in my own watch.

"The ship's ourn--that's what we've done," he said.

"The skipper's dead as a nail up there, I doubt," exclaimed another,
indicating the poop with a movement of the head; "and if you'll step on
to the main-deck you'll see how we've handled Mister Duckling!"

"And what do _you_ mean to do?" exclaimed a man, one of the four who
had accompanied me to the wreck. "_We_'re masters now, I suppose you
know, and so I hope you aren't agin us."

At this moment the carpenter, followed by a few others, came shoving
into the cuddy.

"Oh, there he is!" he cried.

He grasped me by the arm and led me out of the cabin, and bidding me
stand at the end of the table, with my face looking aft, ran to the
door, and bawled at the top of his voice, "Into the cuddy, all hands!"

Those who were on the poop came scuffling along, dragging something
with them, and presently rose a cry of "one--two--three!" and there
was a soft thud upon the main-deck--the body of the captain, in fact,
pitched off the poop--and then the men came running in and stood in a
crowd on either side the table.

This was a scene I am not likely ever to forget, nor the feelings
excited in me by it.

The men were variously dressed, some in yellow sou'westers, some
in tight-fitting caps, in coarse shirts, in suits of oil-skin, in
liberally patched monkey-jackets. Some of them, with black beards and
moustachios and burnt complexions, looked swarthy and sinister enough
in the lamplight; some were pale with the devilish spirit that had
been aroused in them; every face, not excepting the youngest of the
ordinary seamen, wore a passionate, reckless, malignant look. They ran
their eyes over the cuddy as strangers would, and one of them took a
glass off a swinging tray, and held it high, saying grimly, "By the
Lord! we'll have something fit to swaller now! No more starvation and
stinking water!"

I noticed the boatswain--named Ferroll--the only quiet face in the
crowd. He met my eye, and instantly looked down.

"Now, Mr. Royle," said the carpenter, "we're all ekals here, with a
fust-rate execootioner among us (pointing to the big sailor, Johnson),
as knows, when he's axed, how to choke off indiwiduals as don't make
theirselves sootable to our feelin's. What we're all here collected for
to discover, is this--are you with us, or agin us?"

"With you," I replied, "in everything but murder."

Some of them growled, and the carpenter exclaimed hastily--

"We don't know what you call murder. We aren't used to them sort o'
expressions. What's done has happened, ain't it? And I _have_ heerd
tell of accidents, which is the properest word to conwey our thoughts."

He nodded at me significantly.

"Look here," said I. "Just a plain word with you before I am asked any
more questions. There's not a man among you who doesn't know that I
have been warm on your side ever since I learnt what kind of provisions
you were obliged to eat. I have had words with the captain about your
stores, and it is as much because of my interference in that matter as
because of my determination not to let a woman die upon a miserable
wreck, that he clapped me in irons. I don't know what you mean to do
with me, but I'll not say I don't care. I do care. I value my life,
and in the hope of saving it, I'll tell you this, and it's God's
truth--that if you take my life you'll be killing a man who has been
your friend at heart, who has sympathized with you in your privations,
who has never to his knowledge spoken harshly to you, when he had the
power to do so, and who, had he commanded this vessel, would have
shifted your provisions long ago."

So saying, I folded my arms and gazed fixedly at the carpenter.

They listened to me in silence, and when I had done broke into various
exclamations.

"We know all that."

"We don't owe _you_ no grudge."

"We don't want your life. Just show us what to do--that's what it is."

I appeared to pay no attention to their remarks, but kept my eyes
resolutely bent on Stevens, the carpenter, that they might see I
accepted him as their mouthpiece, and would deal only with him.

"Well," he began, "all what you say is quite correct, and we've no
fault to find with you. What I says to you this evenin' through the
port-hole I says now--will you navigate this here wessel for us to the
part as we've agreed on? and if you'll do that you can choose officers
out of us, and we'll do your bidding as though you was lawful skipper,
and trust to you. But I say now, and I says it before all hands here,
that if you take us where we don't want to go, or put us in the way of
any man-o'-war, or try in any manner to bring us to book for this here
job, so help me, Mr. Royle, and that's your name, as mine is William
Stevens, and I say it before all hands here, we'll sling you overboard
as sartin as there's hair growin' on your head--we will; we'll murder
you out an' out. All my mates is a followin' of me--so you'll please
mind that!"

"I hear you," I replied, "and will do your bidding, but on this
condition--that having killed the captain, you will swear to me that no
more lives shall be sacrificed."

"By Gor, no!" shouted the cook. "Don't swear dat! Wait till by-um-by.

"Be advised by me!" I cried, seizing the fellow's frightful meaning,
and dreading the hideous scene it portended. "We have an old man and a
young girl on board. Are they safe?"

"Yes," answered several voices; and the cook jabbered, "Yes, yes!"
with horrid contortions of the face, under the impression that I had
mistaken his interruption.

"We have the steward and the chief mate?"

"Dat's dey! dat's dey!" screamed the cook. "No mercy upon 'em! Hab no
mercy upon us! Him strike me on de jaw and kick me! T'oder one poison
us! No mercy!" he howled, and several joined in the howl.

"Look here! I am a single man against many," I said; "but I am not
afraid to speak out--because I am an Englishman speaking to Englishmen,
with one bloodthirsty yellow savage among you!" There was a shout of
laughter. "If you wish it, I will go on my knees to you and implore you
not to stain your hands with these men's blood. You have them in your
power--you cannot better your position by killing them--be merciful!
Mates, how would you kill them?--in cold blood? Is there an Englishman
among you who would slaughter a defenceless man? who would stand by and
see a defenceless man slaughtered? There is an Almighty God above you,
and He is the God of vengeance! Hear me!"

"We'll let the steward go!" cried a voice; "but we want our revenge
upon Duckling, and we'll have it. Damn your sermons!"

And once again the ominous growling of angry men muttering altogether
arose; in the midst of which the fellow who was steering left the wheel
to sing out through the skylight--

"It's as black as thunder to leeward. Better stand by, or the ship 'll
be aback!"

"Now what am I to do?" I exclaimed.

"We give you command. Out with your orders--we'll obey 'em," came the
answer.

In a few moments I was on the poop. By the first glance I threw upwards
I saw that the ship was already aback.

"Port your helm--hard a port!" I shouted. "Let go the port-braces fore
and aft! Round with the yards smartly!"

Fortunately not only was the first coming of the wind light, but the
canvas on the ship was comparatively small. The mainsail, cross-jack,
the three royals, two top-gallant sails, spanker, flying and outer
jibs were furled, and there was a single reef in the fore and mizzen
topsails. The yards swung easily and the sails filled, and not knowing
what course to steer, I braced the yards up sharp and kept her close.

The sky to the south looked threatening, and the night was very dark.
I ran below to look at the glass, and found a slight fall, but nothing
to speak of. This being so, I thought we might hold on with the
topsails as they were for the present, and ordered the top-gallant
sail to be furled. The men worked with great alacrity, singing out
lustily; indeed, it was difficult for me, standing on the poop and
giving orders, to realize the experiences of the last hour: and yet I
might know, by the strange trembling and inward and painful feeling of
faintness which from time to time seized me, that both my moral and
physical being had received a terrible shock, and that I should feel
the reality more keenly when my excitement was abated and I should have
no other occupation than to think.

The only food I had taken all day was the two ship's biscuits, and
feeling the need of some substantial refreshment to relieve me of the
sensation of faintness, I left the poop to seek the carpenter, in order
to request him to keep watch whilst I went below.

When on the quarter-deck, and looking towards the cuddy, I perceived
two figures huddled together just outside the cuddy door. There was
plenty of light here from the lamps inside, and I at once saw that the
two bodies were those of Duckling and Coxon.

I stepped up to them. Coxon lay on his back with his face exposed,
and Duckling was right across him, breast downwards, his head in the
corner and his feet towards me. There was no blood on either of them.
Coxon had evidently been struck over the head from behind, and killed
instantly; his features were composed, and his grey hairs made him look
a reverend object in death.

Some men on the main-deck watched me looking at the bodies, and when
they saw me take Duckling by the arm and turn him on his back, one
of them called: "That's right; keep the beggar alive! he's cookee's
portion, he is!"

These exclamations attracted the attention of the carpenter, who came
aft immediately and found me stooping over Duckling.

"He's dead, I reckon," he said.

"Dead, or next door to it," I replied. "Better for him if he is dead.
The captain's a corpse, killed quickly enough, by the look of him," I
continued, gazing at the white, still face at my feet. "You had better
get him carried forward and covered up. Where's the body of the sailor
I brought on board?"

"Why, pitched overboard like a dead rat, by orders of this Christian,"
he answered, giving the captain's body a kick. "He had a good deal of
feelin', this pious gentleman. Why do you want him covered up? Let him
go overboard now, won't 'ee? Hi, mates!" he called to the men who were
looking on. "Here's another witness agin us for the Day o' Judgment!
Heave him into the sea, my hearties! We don't want to give him no
excuse to soften the truth for our sakes when he's called upon to spin
his yarn!"

The men flocked round the bodies, and whilst three of them caught up
the corpse of the skipper as if it had been a coil of rope, others of
them began to handle Duckling.

"Him too?" asked one.

"What do you say, Mr. Royle?" demanded the carpenter.

"It ain't Mr. Royle's consarn--it's cookee's!" cried one of the men.
And he began to bawl for "cookee!"

Meantime the fellows who held the captain's body, not relishing their
burden, went to leeward; and two of them taking the shoulders and one
the feet, they began to swing him, and at a given word, shot him over
the bulwarks. They then came back quite unconcernedly, one of them
observing that the devil ought to be very much obliged to them for
their handsome present.

The cook now approached, walked aft by some men who held him by the
arms. They were laughing uproariously, which was explained when I saw
that the cook was drunk.

"Here's your friend, Mr. Cookee," said Stevens, stirring Duckling with
the toe of his boot. "He's waitin' for you to know wot's to become of
him."

"Him a berry good genelman," returned the cook, pulling off his cap
with drunken gravity, and making a reeling bow to the body. "Me love
dis genelman like my own son. Nebber knew tenderer-hearted man. Him
gib me a nice blow here," holding his clenched fist to his jaw, "and
anoder one here," clapping his hand to his back. Then, after a pause,
he kicked the dying or dead man savagely in the head, yelling in a
hideous falsetto, "Oh, I'll skin um alive! Oh, I'll pull his eyes out
and make um swaller dem! He kick an' strike honest English cook! Oh,
my golly! I'll cut off his foot! Gib me a knife, sar," looking around
him with a wandering, gleaming eye. "Gib me a knife, I say, an' you see
what I do!"

One of the ruffians actually gave him a knife.

I grasped the carpenter's arm.

"Mr. Stevens," I exclaimed in his ear, "you'll not allow this! For
God's sake, don't let this drunken cannibal disgrace our manhood by
such brutal deeds before us! Living or dead, better fling the body
overboard! Don't let him be tortured if living; and if dead, is not
your revenge complete?"

The carpenter made no answer, and sick with horror and disgust I was
turning away, feeling powerless to deal with these wretches, when, the
cook already kneeling and baring his arm for I know not what bloody
work, Stevens sprang forward and fetched him such a thump under the
chin, that he rolled head over heels into the lee-scuppers.

The men roared with laughter.

"Now then, overboard with this thing!" the carpenter shouted; "and if
cookee wants more wengeance, fling him overboard arter him!"

They seized Duckling as they had seized Coxon, and slung him overboard,
just as they had slung the other. Some of them ran to the cook, and
it was impossible to judge whether they were in earnest or not when
they shrieked out, "Overboard with him, too! We can't separate the
friends!" The cook at all events believed they meant no joke, for
uttering a prolonged yell of terror, he wriggled with incredible
activity out of their hands, and rushed forward like a steam-engine.
They did not offer to pursue him; and, ill with these scenes of horror,
I called to the carpenter and asked him to step on the poop whilst I
went into the cuddy.

"What to do there?" he inquired suspiciously.

"To get something to eat. I have had nothing all day but two of the
ship's bad biscuits."

"Right," he said. "But, before I go, I'll tell you what's agreed among
us. You're to take charge, and sarve with me and the bo'sun, turn and
turn about on deck. That's agreeable, ain't it?"

"Quite."

"You're to do all the piloting of the ship, and navigate us to where
the ship's company agrees upon."

"I understand."

"We three 'll live aft here, and the ship's company forrards; but all
the ship's stores 'll be smothered, and the cuddy provisions sprung,
d'ye see? likewise the grog and whatsomever there may be proper to eat
and drink. We're all to be ekals, and fare and fare alike, though the
crew 'll obey orders as usual. You're to have the skipper's berth, and
I'll take yourn; and the bo'sun he'll take Duckling's. That we've all
agreed on afore we went to work, and so I thought I'd let you know."

"Well, Mr. Stevens," I replied, "as I told you just now, I'll do your
bidding. I'll take the ship to the place you may name; and as I shan't
play you false (though I have no notion of your intentions), so I hope
you won't play me false. I have begged for the steward's life, and you
have promised to spare him. And how are the two persons we saved to be
treated?"

"They're to live along with us here. All that's settled, I told yer.
But I'm not so sure about the steward. I never made no promise about
sparing of him."

"Look here!" I exclaimed sternly. "I am capable of taking this ship
to any port you choose to name. There is not another man on board who
could do this. I can keep you out of the track of ships, and help you
in a number of ways to save your necks. Do you understand me? But I
tell you--on my oath--if you murder the steward, if any further act of
violence is committed on board this ship, I'll throw up my charge, and
you may do your worst. These are my terms, easier to you than to me.
What is your answer?"

He reflected a moment and replied, "I'll talk to my mates about it."

"Do so," I said. "Call them aft now. But you had better get on deck, as
the ship wants watching. Talk to them on the poop."

He obeyed me literally, calling for the hands to lay aft, and I was
left alone.

I went into the steward's pantry, where I found some cold meat and
biscuit and a bottle of sherry. These things I carried to the aftermost
end of the table. Somehow I did not feel greatly concerned about the
debate going on overhead, as I knew the men could not do without me;
nor did I believe the general feeling against the steward sufficiently
strong to make them willing to sacrifice my services to their
revengeful passions.

I fell to the meat and wine as greedily as a starving man, and was
eating very heartily, when I felt a light touch on my arm. I turned
hastily and confronted the girl whom I had brought away from the
wreck. Her hair hung loose over her shoulders, and she was as pale
as marble. But her blue eyes were very brilliant, and fired with a
resolved and brave expression, and I thought her beautiful as she stood
before me in the lamplight with her hair shining about her face.

"Are you Mr. Royle?" she asked, in a low but most clear and sweet voice.

"I am," I replied, rising.

She took my hand and kissed it.

"You have saved my father's life and mine, and I have prayed God to
bless you for your noble courage. I have had no opportunity to thank
you before. They would not let me see you. The captain said you had
mutinied and were in irons. My father wishes to thank you--his heart is
so full that he cannot rest--but he is too weak to move. Will you come
and see him?"

She made a movement towards the cabin next the pantry.

"Not now," I said. "You should be asleep, resting after your terrible
trials."

"How could I sleep?" she exclaimed with a shudder. "I have heard all
that has been said. I heard them killing the man in that cabin there."

She clasped her hands convulsively.

"Frightful things have happened," I said, speaking quickly, for I every
moment expected the men to come running down the companion-ladder, near
which we were conversing; "but the worst has passed. Did not you hear
them answer me that you and your father were safe? Go, I beg you, to
your cabin and sleep if you can, and be sure that no harm shall befall
you whilst I remain in this ship. I have a very difficult part before
me, and wish to reflect upon my position. And the sense that _your_
security will depend upon my actions," I added, moved by her beauty
and the memory of the fate I had rescued her from, "will make me doubly
vigilant."

And as she had kissed my hand on meeting me, so now I raised hers to my
lips; and obedient to my instructions, she entered her cabin and closed
the door.

I stood for some time engrossed, to the exclusion of all other
thoughts, by the picture impressed on my mind by the girl's sweet face.
It inspired a new kind of energy in me. Whatever qualms my conscience
may have suffered from my undertaking to navigate the ship for the
satisfaction and safety of a pack of ruffians, merely because I stood
in fear of my life, were annihilated by the sight of this girl. The
profound necessity enjoined upon me to protect her from the dangers
that would inevitably come upon her, should my life be taken, so
violently affected me as I stood thinking of her, that my cowardly
acquiescence in the basest proposals which the crew could submit, would
have been tolerable to my conscience for her lonely and helpless sake.

The voices of the men overhead, talking in excited tones, awoke me to a
sense of my situation. I took another draught of wine, and entered the
captain's cabin, wishing to inspect the log-book that I might ascertain
the ship's position at noon on the preceding day.

The shadow of the mizzen-mast fell right upon the interior as I opened
the cabin door. I looked about me for a lamp, but was suddenly scared
by the spectacle of a man crawling on his hands and knees out of a
corner.

"Oh, my God!" cried a melancholy voice. "Am I to be killed! Will they
murder me, sir? Oh, sir, it is in your power to save me. They'll obey
you. I have a wife and child in England, sir. I am a miserable sinner,
and not fit to die."

And the wretched creature burst into tears, and crawled close to my
legs, and twined his arms around them.

"Go back into your corner," I said. "Don't let them hear or see you. I
can make no promises, but will do my best to save your life. Back with
you now! Be a man, for God's sake! Your whining will only amuse them.
Be resolute; and should you have to face them, meet them bravely."

He went crawling back to his corner, and I seeing the log-book open on
the table, carried it under the lamp in the cuddy. There I read off the
sights of the previous day, replaced the book, and mounted to the poop.

The dawn was breaking in the east, and the sky heavy, though something
of its threatening character had left it. There was a smart sea on,
but the ship lay pretty steady, owing to the wind having freshened
enough to keep the vessel well over. We were making no headway to speak
of, the yards being against the masts, and but little canvas set. The
fellow steering lounged at the wheel, one arm through the spokes, and
his left leg across his right shin, letting all hands know by this free
and easy attitude that we were all equals now, and that he was only
there to oblige. He was watching the men assembled round the forward
saloon skylight, and now and then called out to them.

There were eight or nine of the crew there and on the top of the
skylight, and in the centre of the throng were squatted the boatswain
and the carpenter.

Many of them were smoking, and some of them laid down the law with
their forefingers upon the palms of their hands. I saw no signs of the
cook, and hoped that the fright the evil-minded scoundrel had undergone
would keep him pretty quiet for a time.

Not thinking it politic to join the men until they summoned me, I
walked to the compass to see how the ship's head lay; whereupon the
man steering, out of a habit of respect too strong for him to control,
drew himself erect, and looked at the sails, and then at the card, as a
man intent upon his work. I made no observation to him, and swept the
horizon through my hands, which I hollowed to collect the pale light,
but could discover nothing save the rugged outline of waves.

Just then the men saw me, and both the carpenter and the boatswain
scrambled off the skylight, and they all came towards me.

A tremor ran through me which I could not control, but strength
was given me to suppress all outward manifestation of emotion, and
I awaited their approach with a forced tranquillity which, as I
afterwards heard, gave the more intelligent and better disposed among
them a good opinion of me.

The carpenter said, "Most of us are for leaving the steward alone; but
there's three of us as says that he showed hisself so spiteful in the
way he used to sarve out the rotten stores, and swore to such a lie
when he said the pork was sweet, before it went into the coppers, that
they're for havin' some kind o' rewenge."

"None of you want his life, do you?"

"Damn his life!" came a growl. "Who'd take what ain't of no use even to
him as owns it?"

"Which of you wants revenge?" I asked.

There was a pause; and Fish, projecting his extraordinary head, said,
"Well, I'm one as dew."

"Suppose," said I, "you were to see this wretched creature grovelling
on his hands and knees, weeping and moaning like a woman, licking the
deck in his agony of fear, and already half dead with terror. Would not
such a miserable sight satisfy your thirst for revenge? What punishment
short of death that you can inflict would make him suffer more dreadful
tortures than his fear has already caused him? Fish, be a man, and
leave this hunted wretch alone."

He muttered something under his breath, though looking, I was glad to
see, rather shame-faced, and the boatswain said--

"There's something more, Mr. Royle. He knows where to lay his hands on
the cuddy provisions, and if we knock him on the head we shan't be able
to find half that'll be wanted. What I woted was that we should make
him wait upon us, and let him have nothen but the ship's stores to eat,
whilst he sarves us with the cuddy's."

"Won't that do?" I exclaimed, addressing the others, at the same time
receiving a glance from the boatswain which showed me that I should
have an ally in him: as indeed I had expected; for this was the only
one of the forecastle hands who had come from London with us, and I was
pretty sure he had joined in the mutiny merely to save his life.

"Oh yes, that'll do!" some of them answered impatiently; and one
said, "Wot's the use of jawing about the steward? We want to talk of
ourselves. Where's the ship bound to? _I_ don't want to be hanged when
I get ashore."

This sensible observation was delivered by Johnson.

"Now then, if you like, we'll come to that," said I, immensely
relieved; for I not only knew that the steward's life was safe,
but that in their present temper no further act of violence would
be perpetrated. "Mr. Stevens, you told me that all your plans were
prepared. Am I to have your confidence?"

"Sartinly," replied the fellow, looking around upon the assembled faces
fast growing distinguishable in the gathering light. "You're a scholard
and can sail the ship for us, and we look to you to get us out o' this
mess, for we've treated you well and made you skipper."

"Go ahead," I exclaimed, seating myself in a nonchalant way on one of
the gratings abaft the wheel.

"This here mutiny," began the carpenter, after casting about in his
mind for words, "is all along o' bad treatment. Had the capten acted
fair and proper, _we_'d ha' acted fair an' proper. He as good as swore
that he'd put in for fresh stores, but never altered the ship's course,
and we wouldn't starve no longer. So we up and did the business. But we
never meant to kill him. We was afraid he'd ha' had pistols on him, and
so some of us knocked him down unaweers, and knocked too hard, that was
all. And t'other one he struggled so, instead of givin' up when he saw
we was too many for ten o' the likes of him, that he died of his own
doin'; and that's a fact, mates, ain't it?"

"Ay," responded a gruff voice. "He'd ha' gouged my eye out. He had his
thumb in my mouth workin' away as if he thought my tooth was my eye. He
drawed blood with his thumb, and I had to choke it out of my mouth, or
he'd ha' tore my tongue out!"

So saying, he expectorated violently.

"To come back to wot I was saying," resumed the carpenter; "it's this.
When me and my mates made up our minds to squench the skipper and his
bully mate for their wrongful dealings with us, one says that our plan
was to run the ship to the North Ameriky shore somewheeres. One says,
Floridy way; and another, he says round into the Gulf o' Mexico, within
reach o' New Orleans; and another, he says, 'Let's get south, mates,
upon the coast of Africa;' and another, he says he's for making the
ice, right away north, up near Baffin Land. But none was agreeable to
that. We aren't resolved yet, but we're most all for Ameriky, because
it's a big place, pretty nigh big enough to hide in."

Some of the men laughed.

"And so," continued the carpenter, "our plan is this: as easy as
sayin' your prayers. We'll draw lots and choose upon the coast for
you to run us to; and when we're a day's sail of them parts, leavin'
you to tell us and to keep us out o' the way of ships, d'ye mind, Mr.
Royle?"--with stern significance: I nodded--"some of us gets into the
long-boat and some into the quarter-boats, and we pulls for the shore.
And wot we do and says when we gets ashore needn't matter, eh, mates?
We're shipwrecked mariners, destitoot and forlorn, and every man's for
hisself. And so that's our plan."

"Yes, that's our plan," said one: "but it ain't all. You're not putting
everything to Mr. Royle, mate."

"Look here, Bill," answered the carpenter savagely. "Either I'm to
manage this here business or I'm not. If _you_'re for carryin' of it
on, good and well--say the word, and then we'll know the time o' day.
But either it must be you or it must be I--there ain't room for two
woices in one mouth."

"_I_'ve got nothen to say," rejoined the man addressed as "Bill,"
extending his arms and turning his back; "only I thought as you might
ha' forgot."

What the carpenter was holding back I could not guess; but I exhibited
no curiosity. Neither did I tell them that our course to the "American
shores," as they called it, would bring us right in the road of vessels
from all parts of the world. My business was to listen and to act as
circumstances should dictate, with good judgment, if possible, for the
preservation of my own and the lives of the old man and his daughter.

The carpenter now paused to hear what I had to say. Finding this, I
exclaimed--

"I know what you want me to do; and the sooner you fix upon a point to
start for the better."

"Can't you advise us?" said one of the men. "Give us some place easily
fetched."

"I was never on the North American coast," I answered.

"Well, Ameriky ain't the only place in the world," said Fish.

"You'd best not say that when you're there," exclaimed Johnson.

"Most of the hands wants to go ashore in Ameriky, and so that's
settled, mates," said the carpenter sharply.

"Let's keep south, anyhow, say I. If we can make New Orleans there's
plenty of vessels sailing every day from that port, paying good wages,"
said Johnson.

"And every man can choose for hisself where he'll sail for," observed
Fish.

"Make up your minds," I exclaimed, "and I'll alter the ship's course."

So saying, I got off the grating and walked to the other end of the
poop.

I was much easier in my mind now that I had observed the disposition of
the men. They were unquestionably alarmed by what they had done, which
was tolerable security against the commission of further outrages.
Their project of quitting the ship when near land and making for the
shore, where, doubtless, they would represent themselves as shipwrecked
seamen, was practicable and struck me as ingenious; for as soon as they
got ashore they would disperse, and ship on board fresh vessels, and
so defy inquiry even should suspicion be excited, or one of them peach
upon his fellows. These I at least assumed to be their plans. But how
far they would affect my own safety I could not tell. I doubted if they
would let me leave the ship, as they might be sure that on my landing
I should hasten, to inform against them. But I would not allow my
mind to be troubled with considerations of the future at that time.
All my energies were required to deal with the crisis of the moment,
and to guard myself against being led by too much confidence in their
promises, into any step which might prove fatal to me and those I had
promised to protect.

The dawn was now bright in the east and the wind strong from the
southward. The ship was chopping on the tumbling seas with scarcely
any way upon her; but the menacing aspect of the sky was fast fading,
and there was a promise of fair weather in the clouds, which ranged
high and out of the reach of the breeze that was burying the ship's lee
channels.

Presently the carpenter called to me, and I went over to the men.

"We're all resolved, Mr. Royle," said he in a pretty civil voice, "and
our wotes is for New Orleans. Plenty of wessels is wrecked in the Gulf
of Mexico, as I've heerd tell; and when we're about fifty miles off,
you'll say so, and give us the bearings of the Mississippi, and we'll
not trouble you any more."

"How's her head?" I asked the man at the wheel.

"Sou'-west," he replied.

"Keep her away," I exclaimed, for the weather-leeches were flat.

"What's our true course for New Orleans?" asked the carpenter
suspiciously.

"Stop a bit and I'll show you," I answered, and went below to the
captain's cabin to get the chart.

"Steward!" I called.

"Yes, sir," replied the miserable whining voice. It was still too dark
for me to see the man.

"Make your mind easy--they'll not hurt you," I said.

He started up and rushed towards me like a madman.

"May God in heaven bless you!" he cried, delirious with joy.

"Hold off!" I exclaimed, keeping him away with my outstretched hand.
"Get your wits about you and remain here for the present. Don't let
them hear you, and don't show yourself until I call you."

I could have said nothing better to repress his violent manifestations
of delight; for he at once went cowering again into the gloom of the
corner.

I struck a wax match, and after a short search found the chart of the
North Atlantic upon which the ship's course, so far as she had gone up
to noon on the preceding day, was pricked off. I took this on deck,
spread it on the skylight and showed our whereabouts to the men.

"Our course," said I, "is south-west and by west."

They bent their faces over the chart, studying it curiously.

"Are you satisfied, Mr. Stevens?" I asked him.

"Oh, I suppose it's all right," answered he.

"Slacken away the lee-braces," I said. "Put your helm up" (to the man
at the wheel).

The men went tumbling off the poop to man the braces, and in a few
minutes we were making a fair wind.

Both the carpenter and the boatswain remained on the poop.

"Some hands lay aloft and loose the fore and main top-gallant sails!" I
called out. And turning to the carpenter: "Mr. Stevens," I said, "I'll
navigate this ship for you and your mates to within fifty miles off the
mouths of the Mississippi, as you wish; but on the conditions I have
already named. Do you remember?"

"Oh yes," he growled. "We've done enough--too much, I dessay, though
not more than the beggars desarved. All that we want is to get out o'
this cursed wessel."

"Very well," I said. "But I won't undertake to pilot this ship safely
unless my orders are obeyed."

"The men are quite willin' to obey you, so long as you're true to 'em,"
he rejoined.

"You may do what you like with the cuddy stores; though if you take my
advice you will let the steward serve them out in the regular way, that
they may last; otherwise you will eat them all up before we reach our
journey's end, and have to fall back upon the bad provisions. But I
must have control of the spirits."

"And what allowance do you mean to put us on?" demanded the carpenter.

"I shall be advised by you," said I.

This was turning the tables. He pulled off his cap and scratched his
head.

"Three tots a day?" he suggested.

"Very well," I said; "but you'll stop at that?"

"Well, perhaps we can do on three tots a day," he answered, after
deliberating.

"And you engage that the steward will be protected against any violence
while serving out the men's allowance?"

"Mates!" he suddenly called out to the men who were standing by to
sheet home the top-gallant sails; "will three tots o' grog a day keep
you alive?"

"Are we to have it all at once?" one of them answered.

"No," I replied; "three times a day."

"Now then, my lads, let's know your minds," cried the boatswain.

A young ordinary seaman answered--"Three ain't enough." But one of
the older hands turned upon him, exclaiming, "Why, you bit of a
snuffler! where will _you_ stow all that rum? Don't go answerin' for
your betters, my young scaramouch, or maybe you'll be findin' yourself
brought up with a round turn. That'll do!" he called out to us.

"Right you are!" replied the carpenter.

"Sheet home!" I cried, as the sails fell from the top-gallant yards,
anxious to clinch this matter of the grog.

And so it rested.


END OF VOL. I.


    LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET
    AND CHARING CROSS.




Transcriber's Notes:


Punctuation and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in the three volumes of this novel, or to remedy
simple typographical errors; otherwise they were not changed.

Dialect and other non-standard spellings have not been changed.
Examples of unchanged spelling: "befel", "mirrowed", "dose" (for
"doze"), "jobbed" (for "jabbed"), "wessel" (for "vessel") "biled" (for
"boiled").

Spaces before the contraction "'ll" (for "will") have been retained.

Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines have been retained.









        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK OF THE GROSVENOR, VOLUME 1 OF 3 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Wreck of the Grosvenor, Volume 2 of 3
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Wreck of the Grosvenor, Volume 2 of 3


Author: William Clark Russell

Release date: December 24, 2013 [eBook #44498]
                Most recently updated: November 3, 2015

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK OF THE GROSVENOR, VOLUME 2 OF 3 ***




Produced by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR."




                                  THE
                       WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR:"

                             AN ACCOUNT OF
                    _THE MUTINY OF THE CREW AND THE
                           LOSS OF THE SHIP_
                   WHEN TRYING TO MAKE THE BERMUDAS.

                          _IN THREE VOLUMES._
                                VOL. II.

                                LONDON:
               SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE & RIVINGTON,
                  CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET.
                                 1877.

                        (_All rights reserved._)




                                LONDON:
                  PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
                   STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.




THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR."




CHAPTER I.


As the men had been up all night, I recommended the carpenter to go to
them and tell them that the watches would not be altered, and that the
watch whose spell it was below should turn in.

Some, it appeared, asked that rum should be served out to them; but
the carpenter answered that none should be given them until breakfast
time, and that if they got talking too much about the drink, he'd run
a bradawl into the casks and let the contents drain out; for if the
men fell to drinking, the ship was sure to get into a mess, in which
case they might be boarded by the crew of another vessel and carried to
England, where nothing less than hanging or transportation awaited them.

This substantial advice from the lips of the man who had been foremost
in planning the mutiny produced a good effect, and the fellows who had
asked for spirits were at once clamorously assailed by their mates;
so that, in their temper, had the carpenter proposed to fling the rum
casks overboard, most of the hands would have consented and the thing
being done.

All this I was told by the boatswain, who had left the poop with the
carpenter, but returned before him. I took this opportunity of being
alone with the man to ask him some questions relative to the mutiny,
and particularly inquired if he could tell me what was that intention
which the man named "Bill" had asked the carpenter to communicate
to me, but which he had refused to explain. The boatswain, who was
at bottom a very honest man, declared that he had no notion of the
intention the carpenter was concealing, but promised to try and worm
the secret out of Johnson or others who were in it, and impart it to me.

He now informed me that he had come into the mutiny because he saw the
men were resolved, and also because they thought he took the captain's
part, which was a belief full of peril to him. He said that he could
not foresee how this trouble would end; for though the idea of the men
to quit the ship and make for the shore in open boats was feasible,
yet they would run very heavy risks of capture any way; for if they
came across a ship while in the boats they could not refuse to allow
themselves to be taken on board, where, some of the mutineers being
very gross and ignorant men, the truth would certainly leak out; whilst
as to escaping on shore, it was fifty to one if the answers they made
to inquiries would not differ so widely one from another as to betray
them.

But at this point our conversation was interrupted by the carpenter
coming aft to ask me to keep watch whilst he and the boatswain turned
in, as he for one was "dead beat," and would not be of any service
until he had rested.

It was now broad daylight, the east filled with the silver splendours
of the rising sun. I descried a sail to windward, on the starboard
tack, heading eastward. I made her out through the glass to be a small
topsail schooner, but as we were going free with a fresh breeze we soon
sank her hull.

The sight of this vessel, however, set me thinking on my own position.
What would be thought and how should I be dealt with when (supposing I
should ever reach land) I should come to tell the story of this mutiny?
But this was a secondary consideration. My real anxiety was to foresee
how the men would act when I had brought them to the place they wished
to arrive at. Would they give such a witness against their murderous
dealings as I was, a chance to save my life?--I, whose plain testimony
could set justice on the hunt for every one of them. I could not place
confidence in their assurances. The oaths of such ruffians as many of
them undoubtedly were, were worthless. They would murder me without an
instant's scruple if by so doing they could improve their own chances
of escape; and I was fully persuaded that I should have shared the
fate of Coxon and Duckling in spite of the sympathy I had shown them,
and their declaration that they did not want my life, had they not
foreseen that they would stand in need of some competent person to
navigate the ship for them, and that I was more likely to come into
their projects than either of the men they had murdered.

My agitation was greater than I like to admit; and I turned over in my
mind all sorts of ideas for my escape, but never forgetting the two
helpless persons whose lives I considered wholly dependent on my own
preservation.

At one moment I thought of taking the boatswain into my confidence,
stealthily storing provisions in one of the quarter-boats, and watching
an opportunity to sneak off with him and our passengers under cover of
night.

Then I thought of getting him to sound the minds of the crew, to judge
if there were any who might assist us should we rise upon the more
desperate of the mutineers.

Another notion was to pretend to mistake the ship's whereabouts, and
run her into some port.

But such stratagems as these, easily invented, were in reality
impracticable.

To let the men see that I stood to my work, I never quitted the deck
until six o'clock. The morning was then very beautiful, with a rich and
warm aroma in the glorious southerly breeze, and the water as blue as
the heavens.

On arousing the carpenter in the cabin formerly occupied by me (I found
him in the bunk on my mattress with his boots on, and a pipe belonging
to me in his hand), I told him that the ship could now carry all plain
sail, and advised him to make it. He got out of the bunk in a pretty
good temper, and went along the cuddy; but as he was about to mount
the companion-ladder I called to know if he would see the steward, and
speak to him about serving out the cuddy stores, as I preferred that
he should give the man instructions, since they would best represent
the wishes of the crew. But the truth was, I wanted to pack all the
responsibility that I could upon him, so as to make myself as little
answerable as possible to the men.

"Yes, yes. Fetch him out. Where is he?" he replied, turning round.

"Steward!" I called.

After a pause the door of the captain's cabin opened, and the figure of
the steward stepped forth. Such a woebegone object, with bloodless face
and haggard expression, and red eyes and quivering mouth, hands hanging
like an idiot's, his hair matted, his knees knocking together as he
walked, I never wish to see again.

"Now, young feller," said the carpenter (the steward, by the way, was
about forty years old), "what do you think ought to be done to you,
hey? Is hangin' too mild, or is drownin' more to your fancy? or would
you like to be di-sected by the cook, who is reckoned a neat hand at
carvin'?"

The steward turned his bloodshot eyes upon me, and his white lips moved.

"Mr. Stevens is only joking," I exclaimed, feeling that I would give a
year's pay to strike the ruffian to the earth for his brutal playing
with the miserable creature's terror. "He wants to talk to you about
the cuddy provisions."

The carpenter stared at him grimly, out of a mean tyranny and relish
of his fears; and the poor creature said, "Yes, sir?" lifting his eyes
humbly to the carpenter's face, and folding his hands in an involuntary
attitude of supplication.

"You'll understand, young feller," said the carpenter, thrusting his
hands into his pockets and leaning against the mizzen-mast, "that we're
all equals aboard this here wessel now. No one's above t'other, barring
yourself, who's just nowheeres at all, owin' to your keeping in tow of
the skipper when he was pisoning us with the stores which you, d----
yer! took joy in sarving out! Now, you understand this: you're to turn
to and sarve out the cuddy stores to the men at the proper time, and
three tots o' grog every day to each man. Mr. Ryle 'll tell you how
long our passage 'll last, and you're to make a calkilation of the live
stock so as each watch gits a share of the pigs an' poultry. But you,"
he continued, squirting some tobacco juice from his mouth, "aren't
to touch no other provisions but the stores which the crew's been
eatin' of: mind that! If we catch you tastin' so much as half a cuddy
biscuit, by the living thunder! we'll run you up to the fore-yard-arm!"

He shook his fist in the steward's face, and addressing me, said--

"That's all to be said, ain't it?"

"That's all," I replied; and the steward went cringing and reeling
towards the pantry, whilst the carpenter mounted the companion-ladder.

I entered the cabin, which, to save confusion, I will continue to call
the captain's cabin, and seated myself in a chair screwed down to the
deck before a wide table. This cabin was comfortably furnished with
hanging bookshelves, a fine map of the world, a few coloured prints of
ships, a handsome cot, and mahogany lockers cushioned on top to serve
for seats.

Among some writing materials, a case of mathematical instruments, a
boat's compass, and a variety of other matters which covered the
table, I observed an American five-chambered revolver, which, on
examining, I found was loaded. I at once put this weapon in my pocket,
and after searching awhile, discovered a box of cartridges, which I
also pocketed.

This I considered a very lucky find, as I never knew the moment when
I might stand in need of such a weapon; and whether I should have
occasion to use it or not, it was certainly better in my possession
than in the hands of the men.

I now left my chair to examine the lockers, in the hopes of finding
other firearms; and I cannot express the eagerness with which I
prosecuted the search, because I considered that, should the boatswain
succeed in winning even one man over from the crew, three resolute men,
each armed with a revolver or firearm of any kind, might, by carefully
waiting their opportunity, kill or wound enough of the crew to render
the others an easy conquest.

However, to my unspeakable disappointment, my search proved fruitless;
all that I found in the lockers were clothes belonging to Captain
Coxon, a quantity of papers, old charts, and log-books, some parcels of
cigars, and a bag containing about £30 in silver.

Whilst engaged in these explorations, a knock fell on the door, and on
my replying, the girl came in. I bowed and asked her to be seated, and
inquired how her father did.

"He is still very weak," she answered; "but he is not worse this
morning. I heard your voice just now, and watched you enter this cabin.
I hope you will let me speak to you. I have so much to say."

"Indeed," I replied, "I have been waiting impatiently for this
opportunity. Will you first tell me your name?"

"Mary Robertson. My father is a Liverpool merchant, Mr. Royle, and the
ship in which we were wrecked was his own vessel. Oh!" she exclaimed,
pressing her hands to her face, "we were many hours expecting every
moment to die. I cannot believe that we are saved! and sometimes I
cannot believe that what has happened is real! I think I was going
mad when I saw your ship. I thought the boat was a phantom, and that
it would vanish suddenly. It was horrible to be imprisoned with the
dead body and that mad sailor! The sailor went mad on the first day,
and soon afterwards the passenger--for he was a passenger who lay dead
on the deck--sat up in his bed and uttered a dreadful cry, and fell
forward dead. The mad sailor pointed to him and howled! and neither
papa nor I could get out of the house, for the water washed against it
and would have swept us overboard."

She told me all this with her hands to her face, and her fair hair
flowing over her shoulders, and made a sweet and pathetic picture in
this attitude.

Suddenly she looked up with a smile of wonderful sweetness, and,
seizing my hand, cried--

"What do we not owe you for your noble efforts? How good and brave you
are!"

"You praise me too warmly, Miss Robertson. God knows there was nothing
noble in my efforts, nor any daring in them. Had I really risked my
life to save you, I should still have barely done my duty. How were you
treated yesterday? Well, I hope."

"Oh yes. The captain told the steward to give us what we wanted. I
think the wine he sent us saved papa's life. He was sinking, but
rallied after he had drunk a little of it. I am in a sad plight," she
exclaimed, while a faint tinge of red came into her cheeks. "I have not
even a piece of ribband to tie up my hair with."

She took her beautiful hair in her hands, and smiled.

"Is there nothing in this cabin that will be of use to you?" I said.
"Here is a hair-brush--and it looks a pretty good one. I don't know
whether we shall be able to muster a bit of ribband among us, but I
just now came across a roll of serge, and if you can do anything with
that and a needle and thread, which I'll easily get for you, I'll see
that they are put in your cabin. Here are enough clothes to rig out
your father, at all events, until his own are made ship-shape. But how
am I to help _you_? That has been on my mind."

"I can use the serge if I may have it," she replied, in the prettiest
way imaginable.

"Here it is," I said, hauling it out of the locker; "and I'll get
needles and thread for you presently. No sailor goes to sea without a
housewife, and you shall have mine. And if you will wait a moment I
think I can find something else that may be useful."

Saying which I hurried to my old cabin, unlocked my chest, and took out
a new pair of carpet slippers.

"A piece of bunting or serge fitted into these will make them sit on
your feet," I exclaimed, handing them to her. "And I have other ideas,
Miss Robertson, all which I hope will help to make you a little more
comfortable by-and-by. Leave a sailor alone to find out ways and means."

She took the slippers with a graceful little smile, and put them
alongside the roll of serge; and then, with a grave face, and in an
earnest voice, she asked me to tell her what the men meant to do with
the ship now that they had seized her.

I freely told her as much as I knew, but expressed no fears as to
my own, and hers, and her father's safety. Indeed, I took the most
cheerful view I could of our situation.

"My notion," said I, "is that when the time comes for the men to leave
the ship they will not allow us to go with them. They will oblige us
to remain in her, which is the best thing that could happen; for I am
sure that the boatswain will stay, and with his and the steward's help
there is nothing to prevent us taking the ship into the nearest port,
or lying to until we sight a vessel, and then signalling for help."

I fancy she was about to express her doubts of this result, but
exclaimed instead--

"No matter what comes, Mr. Royle, we shall feel safe with you." And
then, suddenly rising, she asked me to come and see her father.

I followed her at once into the cabin.

The old man lay in an upper bunk, with a blanket over him. He looked
like a dead man, with his white face rendered yet more death-like in
appearance by the dishevelled white hair upon his head, and the long
white beard. He was lying perfectly still, with his eyes closed, his
thin hands folded outside the blanket.

I thought he slept, and motioned to his daughter; but she stooped and
whispered, "Papa, here is Mr. Royle;" whereupon he opened his eyes
and looked at me. The sense of my presence appeared to be very slowly
conveyed to his mind, and then he extended his hand. I took it, and saw
with emotion that tears streamed from his eyes.

"Sir," he exclaimed, in a weak faltering voice, "I can only say, God
bless you!"

I answered cheerfully, "Pray say no more, Mr. Robertson. I want to see
you recover your strength. Thank God, your daughter has survived her
horrible trials, and will soon quite recover from the effects of them.
What now can I do for you? Have you slept?"

"Yes, yes, I have slept; a little, I thank you. Sir, I have witnessed
shocking scenes."

I whispered to Miss Robertson--

"Let me prescribe some medicine that will do you both good. What you
both require is support. I will be with you in a minute."

So saying, I quitted the cabin and entered the pantry. There I found
the steward sitting on the plate chest, with his hands to his temples.

"Now then, my lad," said I; "rouse up. You are not dead yet. Have you
any brandy here?"

He pointed in a mechanical way to a shelf, where were several bottles.
I found what I wanted, and gave him a dose to put heart into him, and
asked him for some eggs. Four or five, the gathering of yesterday from
the kindly hens under the long-boat, lay in the drawer, which he pulled
open. I proceeded to mix two tumblers of eggs and brandy, which I
carried to the next cabin.

"This is my physic, Miss Robertson," I exclaimed, putting one of the
tumblers into her hand; "oblige me by drinking it; and you, sir,"
I continued, addressing the old gentleman, "will not wait for her
example."

They both, to my great satisfaction, swallowed the contents of the
glasses, the effect of which, after some moments, upon Mr. Robertson
was decidedly beneficial, for he thanked me for my kindness in a much
stronger voice, and even made shift to prop himself up on his elbow.

"It is the best tonic in the world," said I, taking Miss Robertson's
glass, "and I am very much obliged to you for your obedience."

The look she gave me was more eloquent than any verbal reply; at
least, I found it so. Her face was so womanly and beautiful, so full
of pathos in its pallor, with something so brave and open in its whole
expression, that it was delightful to me to watch it.

"Now," said I to the old gentleman, "allow me to leave you for a
little. I want to see what the _Grosvenor_ can furnish in the shape of
linen and drapery. Isn't that what they call it ashore? We have found
some serge, and needles and thread are easily got; and I'll set what
wits the unfortunate steward has left in him to work to discover how
Miss Robertson may be made comfortable until we put you both ashore."

"Do not leave us!" cried the old man. "Your society does me good, sir.
It puts life into me. I want to tell you who we are, and about our
shipwreck, and where we were going. The _Cecilia_ was my own vessel. I
am a merchant, doing most of my trade with the Cape--the Cape of Good
Hope. I took my daughter--my only child, sir--to Cape Town, last year,
for a change of scene and air; and I should have stopped another year,
but Mary got tired and wanted to get home, and--and--well, as I was
telling you, Mr--Mr.----"

"Royle," said Miss Robertson.

"Mr. Royle, as I was telling you, Mary got tired; and as the _Cecilia_
was loading at Cape Town--she was a snug sound ship--yes, indeed; and
we went on board, we and a gentleman named--named----"

"Jameson," his daughter suggested.

"Ay, poor Jameson--poor, poor fellow!"

He hid his face, and was silent, I should say, a whole minute,
neither Miss Robertson nor myself speaking. Presently, looking up, he
continued--

"It came on to blow very heavily, most suddenly, a dreadful gale. It
caught the ship in a calm, and she was unprepared, and it snapped all
three masts away. Oh, God, what a night of horror! The men went mad,
and cried that the ship was going stern down, and crowded into the
boats. One went whirling away into the darkness, and one was capsized;
and then the captain said the ship was sinking, and my daughter and
I ran out of the cabin on to the deck. Well, sir," continued the old
man, swallowing convulsive sobs as he spoke, "the ship's side had
been pierced, the captain said, by one of the yards; and she was
slowly settling, and the water came over the deck, and we got into the
house where you found us, for shelter. I put my head to the window and
called the captain to come, and as he was coming the water hurled him
overboard; and there were only myself and my poor girl and Mr. Jameson
and--and--tell him the rest!" he suddenly cried, hiding his eyes and
stretching out his hand.

"Another time, Miss Robertson," I exclaimed, seeing the look of horror
that had come into her face during her father's recital of the story.
"Tell me where you live in England, and let us fancy ourselves in the
dear old country, which, so it please God, we shall all reach safely in
a little time."

But they were both too overcome to answer me. The old man kept his
face concealed, and the girl drew long sobbing breaths with dry eyes.

However, she plucked up presently, and answered that they lived just
out of Liverpool, but that her father had also an estate at Leamington,
near Warwick, where her mother died, and where she spent most of her
time, as she did not like Liverpool.

"Tell me, sir," cried Mr. Robertson, "did you bring the body of poor
Jameson with you? I forget."

"If that was Mr. Jameson whose body lay in the deck-house," I replied,
"I left him on the wreck. There was his coffin, Mr. Robertson, and I
dared not wait to bring off a dead man when living creatures stood in
peril of their lives."

"To be sure, sir!" exclaimed the old gentleman. "You were very right.
You acted with great nobleness, and are most kind to us now--most
kind, Mary, is he not? Let me see?" knitting his brows. "You are not
captain of this ship? I think, my dear, you said that this gentleman
was the mate? Who is the captain, sir?"

His daughter put her finger to her mouth, which puzzled me until
I considered that she either did not want him to know that the
captain was murdered, or, supposing he knew of the murder, that the
circumstance should not be revived in his memory, which was just now
very feeble.

He did not wait for his question to be answered, but asked me where the
ship was bound to?

"New Orleans," I answered, with a glance at his daughter.

"New Orleans!" he exclaimed. "Let me think--that is beyond the West
Indies." And with great eagerness he said, "Will you put into one of
the West India Islands? I am known at Kingston; I have shipped largely
to a firm there, Messieurs Raymondi and Company. Why, my dear, we shall
be very well received, and we shall be able to purchase fresh clothes,"
he continued, holding up his arm and looking at it with a melancholy
smile, "and go home in one of the fine mail packets. Ha! ha! ha! how
things come about!"

He lay back upon his pillow with this short mirthless laugh, and
remained silent. I do not say that his mind was unhinged, but his
intellect was unquestionably impaired by the horrors he had witnessed
and the sufferings he had endured. But then he was an old man--nearer
seventy than sixty, I took him to be; whilst his daughter, whom a
little rest had put upon the high road to recovery, did not appear to
be above twenty years old.

As the time was passing rapidly, I determined to seize the opportunity
of the carpenter being on deck to do what I could to make these
sufferers comfortable. I therefore left them and sang out to the
steward, who came with terrified promptitude, casting the while
and almost at every step, fearful glances in the direction of the
main-deck, where some of the hands were visible.

I gave him the captain's hair-brush to wash, and covered a tray with
the various toilet conveniences with which the ill-fated skipper had
provided himself. These I dispatched by the steward to Miss Robertson,
and I then made the man prepare a tray with a substantial breakfast,
consisting of cold fowl, fine white biscuit, ham, preserved fruit, and
some tea, which I boiled in the pantry by means of a spirit-lamp that
belonged to me.

I took an immense pleasure in supplying these new friends' wants, and
almost forgot the perilous situation I was in, in the agreeable labour
of devising means to comfort the girl, whose life and her father's,
thanks to God, I had been instrumental in preserving.

I made a thorough overhaul of Coxon's effects, holding myself fully
privileged to use them for the benefit of poor Mr. Robertson, and sent
to his cabin a good suit of clothes, some clean linen, and a warm
overcoat.

The steward obeyed me humbly and officiously. He considered his life
still in great danger, and that he must fall a sacrifice to the fury
of the crew if he quitted the cuddy. However, I found him very useful,
for he furnished me with some very good hints, and, among other things,
he, to my great delight, informed me that he had in the steerage a box
of woman's underclothing, which had been made by his wife's hand for
a sister living in Valparaiso, to whom he was taking out the box as a
gift, and that I was very welcome to the contents.

I requested him at once to descend with me and get the box out; but
this job took us over twenty minutes, for the box was right aft, and
we had to clear away upwards of five hundred bird-cages, and a mass of
light wooden packages of toys and dolls to come at it. We succeeded at
last in hauling it into the cuddy, and he fetched the key and raised
the lid; but burst into tears when he saw a letter from his wife,
addressed to his sister, lying on top of the linen.

I told him to put the letter in his pocket, and to be sure that his
sister would be liberally compensated, if all went well with us, for
this appropriation of her property.

"I am not thinking of the clothes, sir," whined the poor fellow, "but
of my wife and child, who I may never see again."

"Nonsense," I exclaimed; "try to understand that a man is never dead
until the breath is out of his body. You are as well off as I am, and
those poor people in the cabin there. What we have to do now is to
help each other, and put a bold face on our troubles. The worst hasn't
arrived yet, and it won't do to go mad with anticipating it. Wait till
it comes, and if there's a road out of it, I'll take it, trust me. Cock
this box under your arm, and take it to Miss Robertson."

I had now done everything that was possible, and to my perfect
satisfaction; for besides having furnished the old gentleman with a
complete change of clothes, I had supplied his daughter with what I
knew she would appreciate as a great luxury--a quantity of warm, dry
underclothing.

It may strike the reader as ludicrous to find me descending into such
trivialities, and perhaps I smiled myself when I thought over the
business that had kept me employed since six o'clock. But shipwreck is
a terrible leveller, and cold and hunger and misery know but little
dignity. How would it seem to Miss Robertson, the daughter of a man
obviously opulent, to find herself destitute of clothing, and accepting
with gratitude such rude articles of dress as one poor workwoman would
make for another of her condition? She, with the memory in her of
abundant wardrobes, of costly silks, and furs, and jewellery, of rich
attire, and the plentiful apparel of an heiress! But the sea pays but
little attention to such claims, and would as lief strip a monarch as a
poor sailor, and set him afloat naked to struggle awhile and drown.




CHAPTER II.


At seven bells, that is, half an hour before eight, I heard the
carpenter's voice shouting down the companion for the steward. I
instantly opened the cabin door to tell the man to go at once, as I
believed that Stevens merely called to give him orders about the men's
breakfast.

This proved to be the case, as I presently learnt on going on deck,
whither I repaired (although it was my watch below) in order to see
what the carpenter was about.

I found him lying upon one of the skylights, with a signal-flag under
his head, smoking a pipe, whilst three or four of the men sat round
him smoking also. All plain sail had been made, as I had directed, and
the ship heading west-south-west under a glorious sky, and all around a
brilliantly clear horizon and an azure sea.

Away on our lee quarter was a large steamer steering south,
brig-rigged, bound, I took it, to the west coast of Africa. The men
about the carpenter made a movement when they saw me, as though they
would leave the poop, but one of them made some remark in a low voice,
which kept them all still. The carpenter, seeing me watching the
steamer, called out--

"She wouldn't take long to catch us, would she? I hope there's no man
on board this wessel as 'ud like to see her alongside, or would do
anything to bring her near. I wouldn't like to be the man as 'ud do
it--would you, Joe?"

"Well, I'd rather ha' made my vill fust than forgot it, if so it were
that I was that man," responded the fellow questioned.

"We're glad you've come up," continued the carpenter, addressing me,
though without shifting his posture, "for blowed if I know what to do
if she _should_ get askin' us any questions. What 'll _you_ do, Mr.
Royle?"

"Let her signal us first," I replied, quite alive to the sinister
suggestiveness of these questions.

"Put the helm up and go astern of her--that's what my advice is," said
one of the men.

"You'll provoke suspicion if you do that," I exclaimed. "However, you
can act as you please."

"Mr. Royle's quite right," said the man addressed as Joe. "Why can't
you leave him alone? He knows more about it than us, mates."

"She's going twelve knots," I said, "and will cross our bows soon
enough. Let her signal, we're not bound to answer."

The men, in spite of themselves, watched her anxiously, and so did
others on the forecastle, such cowards does conscience make of men.
As for myself, I gazed at her with bitter indifference. The help that
I stood in need of was not likely to come from such as she, or indeed
from any vessel short of an inquisitive Government ship. Moreover, the
part I was playing was too difficult to permit me to allow any impulse
to inspire. The smallest distrust that I should occasion might cost me
my life. My _rôle_ then surely was to seem one with the men, heart and
soul.

"Let her go off a point," I exclaimed to the man steering. "They'll not
notice that, and she'll be across us the sooner for it."

We were slipping through the water quickly, and by the time she was on
our weather bow the steamer was near enough to enable us to see the
awning stretched over her after-deck, and a crowd of persons watching
us. She was a great ocean steamer, and went magnificently through the
water. In a few minutes she was dead on end, dwindling the people
watching us, but leaving such a long wake astern of her that we went
over it.

What would I have given to be on board of her!

"Let her come to again!" I sang out.

The carpenter now got off the skylight.

"I've told the steward to turn to and get the men's breakfast,"
said he. "Ourn's to be ready by eight; and I reckon I'll show that
snivelling cockney what it is to be hungry. You don't call this a
mutiny, do yer, Mr. Royle? Why, the men are like lambs."

"Yes, so they are," I answered. "All the same, I shall be glad to feel
dry land under me. The law always hangs the skipper of a mutiny, you
know; and I'm skipper by your appointment. So the sooner we all get out
of this mess the better, eh, Mr. Stevens?"

"That's right enough," said he; "and we look to you to get us out of
it."

"I'll do what you ask me--I won't do more," I answered.

"We don't want more. Enough's what we want. You'll let us see your
reckonings every day--not because we doubt you--but it'll ease the
minds of the men to know that we aren't like to foul the Bermudas."

"The Bermudas are well to the nor'rard of our course," I answered
promptly.

"All right, Mr. Royle, we look to you," he said, with a face on him and
in a tone that meant a good deal more than met the ear. "Now, mates,"
addressing the others, "cut for'ard and get your breakfasts, my lads.
It's eight bells. Mr. Royle, I'll go below and call the boatswain; and
shall him and me have our breakfast and you arterwards, or you fust?
Say the word. I'm agreeable vichever way it goes."

"I'll stop on deck till you've done," I replied, wishing to have the
table to myself.

Down he went, and I advanced to the poop-rail and leaned over it to
watch the men come aft to receive their share of the cuddy stores.

I will do them the justice to say they were quiet enough. Whether the
perception that they no longer recognized any superiors would not
presently prevail; whether quarrels, deeds of violence, and all the
consequences which generally attend the rebellion of ignorant men
would not follow, was another matter. They were decent enough in their
behaviour now; congregating on the main-deck and entering the cuddy
one by one to receive the stores which the steward was serving out.

These stores, so far as I could judge by the contents of the tin dishes
which the men took forward, consisted of butter, white biscuit, a
rasher of ham to each man, and tea or cocoa; excellent fare for men
who had been starved on rotten provisions. I also found that every man
had been served with a glass of rum. They did not seem to begrudge
the privilege assumed by the carpenter and boatswain of occupying the
cuddy and eating at the table there. The impression conveyed to me on
the whole by their aspect and demeanour was that of men subdued and
to a certain extent alarmed by the position in which they had placed
themselves. But for the carpenter, I believe that I at that time and
working upon their then state of mind, could have won them over to
submission and made them willing to bring the ship into port and face
an inquiry into the circumstances of the revolt. But though I believe
this _now_, I conceived the attempt too full of peril to undertake,
seeing that my failure must not only jeopardize my own, but the lives
of poor old Mr. Robertson and his daughter, in the safety of whom I
was so concerned, that I do not say that my profound anxiety did not
paralyse the energy with which I should have attempted my own rescue
had I been alone.

How the men treated the steward I could not tell; but I noticed that
Master Cook was very quiet in his manner. This was a sure sign of the
efficacy of the fright he had received, and it pleased me greatly, as I
had feared he would prove a dangerous and bloodthirsty mutineer and a
terrible influence in the councils of the men.

The carpenter was the first to come on deck. I had seen him (through
the skylight) eating like a cormorant, his arms squared, his brown
tattooed hand busy with his mouth, making atonement for his long fast
in the forecastle. He kept his cap on, but the boatswain had better
manners, and looked, as he faced his mate, a quite superior and
different order of man altogether.

I went below as soon as Stevens appeared, and the boatswain had the
grace to rise, as though he would leave the table, when he saw me. I
begged him to keep his seat, and, calling to the steward, asked to know
how the men had treated him.

"Pretty middling, sir, thank you, sir," he replied, with a trifle more
spirit in his manner. "They're not brutal, sir. The cook never spoke,
sir. Mr. Stevens is rather unkind, but I daresay it's only a way he
has."

The boatswain laughed, and asked him if he had breakfasted.

"No, sir--not yet. I can wait, sir."

"There's plenty to eat and drink," said the boatswain, pointing to the
table.

"Yes, sir, plenty," responded the steward, who, looking on the
boatswain as one of the ringleaders, was as much afraid of him as of
the carpenter.

"Well, then," continued the boatswain, "why don't you tuck in? Mr.
Royle won't mind. Sit there, or take what you want into the pantry."

The steward turned pale, remembering the threats that had been used
towards him if he touched the cuddy stores, and looked upon the
boatswain's civility as a trick to get him hanged.

"Thank you, sir," he stammered; "I've no happetite. I'd rather not eat
anything at present, sir. I'll take a ship's biscuit shortly, sir, with
your leave."

Saying which, and with a ghastly face, he shuffled into the pantry, no
doubt to escape from what he would consider highly murderous attentions.

"Rum customer, that steward, Mr. Royle," said the boatswain, rubbing
his mouth on the back of his hand.

"So should I be had I undergone his sensations," I replied.

"Well, I don't know about that. You see there ain't nothing regular
about a steward. He isn't a sailor and he isn't a landsman; and when
you come to them kind o' mongrels, you can't expect much sperrit. It
isn't fair to expect it. It's like fallin' foul of a marmozeet, because
he isn't as big as a monkey. What about them passengers o' yours, sir?
They've not been sarved with breakfast since I've been here?"

"I have seen to them," I answered. "What has Stevens been talking
about?" As I said this I cast my eyes on the open skylight to see that
our friend was not within hearing.

He shook his head, and after a short pause exclaimed--

"He's a bad 'un! he's a bad 'un! he's an out-and-outer!"

"Do you know which of them struck the captain down?"

"He did," he answered at once.

"I could have sworn it by the way in which he excused the murderer."

"Stevens," continued the boatswain, "is at the bottom of all this
here business--him and the cook. I suppose he didn't want the cook
for a chum, and so knocked him over when he was going to operate
on Duckling's body. But Duckling was a bad 'un too, and so was the
skipper. They've got to thank theirselves for what they got. The crew
never would ha' turned had they been properly fed."

"I believe that," I said. "But I'll tell you what's troubling me,
boatswain. The carpenter has some design behind all this, which he is
concealing. Does he really mean that I should navigate the ship to
within fifty miles of New Orleans?"

"Yes, sir, he do," answered the boatswain, regarding me stedfastly.

"And he means then to heave the ship to, lower away the boats, and make
for one of the mouths of the Mississippi, or land upon some part of the
coast, and represent himself and his companions as castaway sailors?"

"Quite right," said the boatswain, watching me fixedly.

"If that is really his intention," I proceeded, "I cannot believe that
he will allow me to land with the others. He distrusts me. He is as
suspicious as all murderers are."

The boatswain continued eyeing me intently, as a man might who strives
to form a resolution from the expression in another's face.

"He means to scuttle the ship," he said, in a low voice.

"Ah!" I exclaimed, starting. "I should have foreseen this."

"He means to scuttle her just before he puts off in the boats," he
added in a whisper.

I watched him anxiously, for I saw that he had more to tell me. He
looked up at both skylights, then towards the cuddy door, then towards
the companion ladder, bent over to me, and said--

"Mr. Royle, he don't mean to let you leave this vessel."

"He means to scuttle her, leaving me on board?"

He nodded.

"Did he tell you this?"

He nodded again.

"When?"

"Just now."

"And them?" I exclaimed, pointing towards the cabin in which were Mr.
Robertson and his daughter.

"They'll be left too," he replied.

I took a deep breath, and closed the knife and fork on my plate.

"Now then, mate!" bawled the carpenter's voice, down the companion;
"how long are you goin' to be?"

"Coming," answered the boatswain.

A thought had flashed upon me.

"There must be others in this ship whom Stevens distrusts as well
as me," I whispered. "Who are they? Give me but two other men and
yourself, and I'll engage that the ship will be ours! See! if these
men whom he distrusts could be told that, at the last moment, they will
be left to sink in a scuttled ship, they would come over on my side to
save their lives. How are they to be got at?"

He shook his head without speaking, and left the table; but turned to
say, "Don't be in a hurry. I've got two hours afore me, and I'll turn
it over." He then went on deck.

I remained at the cuddy table, buried in thought. The boatswain's
communication had utterly taken me by surprise. That Stevens, after
the promise he had made me that there should be no more bloodshed,
after the sympathy I had shown the men from the beginning, should be
base enough to determine upon murdering me and the inoffensive persons
we had rescued, at the moment when we might think our escape from our
heavy misfortunes certain, was so shocking that the thought of it made
me feel as one stunned. An emotion of deep despair was bred in me, and
then this, in its turn, begot a wild fit of fury. I could scarcely
restrain myself from rushing on deck and shooting the ruffian as he
stood there.

To escape from my own insanity, I ran into the captain's cabin, and
locked the door, and plunged into deep and bitter reflection.

It was idle for me to think of resistance in my then condition. Upon
whom could I count? The boatswain? I could not be sure that he would
aid me single-handed, nor hope that he would try to save my life at the
risk of his own. The steward? Such a feeble-hearted creature would only
hamper me, would be of less use even than old Mr. Robertson. Many among
the crew, if not all of them indeed, must obviously be acquainted with
Stevens' murderous intentions, and would make a strong and desperate
gang to oppose me; and though I should discover the men who were not
in the carpenter's confidence, how could I depend on them at the last
moment?

The feeling of helplessness induced in me by these considerations was
profound and annihilating. I witnessed the whole murderous process as
though it were happening: the ship hove to, the boats shoving away,
one, perhaps, remaining to watch the vessel sink, that they might be in
no doubt of our having perished. All this would happen in the dark too,
for the departure of the men from the ship would only be safe at night,
that no passing vessel might espy them.

An idea that will sound barbarous, though I should not have hesitated
to carry it out could I have seen my way to it, occurred to me. This
was to watch an opportunity when the carpenter was alone, to hurl him
overboard. But here, again, the chances against me were fifty to one.
To destroy the villain without risk of detection, without the act being
witnessed, without suspicion attaching to me on his being missed, would
imply such a host of favouring conditions as the kindliest fortune
could scarcely assemble together.

What then was to be done?

I had already pointed out the course the ship was to steer, and could
not alter it. But though I should plausibly alter her course a point
or two, what could follow? The moment land was sighted, let it be what
coast it would, they would know I had deceived them; or, giving me the
credit of having mistaken my reckonings, they would heave the ship
to themselves, and then would come the dastardly crime. I dared not
signal any passing vessel. Let my imagination devise what it would,
it could invent nothing that my judgment would adopt; since, being
single-handed in this ship, no effort I could make to save the lives of
the persons it was my determination to stand by, but must end in our
destruction.

By such confessions I show myself no hero; but then I do not want
to be thought one. I was, and am, a plain man, placed in one of the
most formidable situations that any one could find himself in. In the
darkness and horror of that time I saw no means of escape, and so I
admit my blindness. A few strokes of the pen would easily show me other
than I was, but then I should not be telling the truth, and should
be falsely taking glory to myself, instead of truly showing it to be
God's, by whose mercy I am alive to tell the story.

My clothes and other things belonging to me being in the cabin now
occupied by Stevens, I opened the door and desired the steward to bring
them to me. My voice was heard by Miss Robertson, who came round the
table to where I stood, and thanked me for my kindness to her and her
father.

She had made good use of the few conveniences I had been able to send
her. Her hair was brushed, and most prettily looped over the comb, and
she wore a collar that became her mightily, which she had found in the
steward's box. She looked a sweet and true English girl; her deathlike
pallor gradually yielding to a healthy white with a tinge of colour on
the cheeks.

"Papa seems better," she said, "and is constantly asking for you; but I
told him," (with the prettiest smile,) "that you require rest as well
as others, and that you have plenty to occupy you."

Then looking earnestly at me for some moments, while her face grew
wonderfully grave, she exclaimed--

"What is wrong, Mr. Royle? What makes you look so anxious and worried?"

"There is plenty to trouble me," I answered, not carelessly, but not
putting too much significance into my tone, for at that moment I
did not think I ought to tell her the truth. "You know the men have
mutinied, and that my position is a difficult one. I have to be careful
how I act, both for my sake and yours."

"Yes, I know that," she said, keeping her clear and thoughtful eyes on
me. "But then you said you did not fear that the men would be violent
again, and that they would leave us on board this ship when we were
near New Orleans."

I watched her face some time without speaking, asking myself if
I should take her into my confidence, if I ought to impart the
diabolical scheme of Stevens, as told me by the boatswain. Certainly
I should have put her off without telling her the truth had not the
courageous expression in her eyes, her firm and beautiful mouth, her
resolute voice and manner, told me she would know how to bear it.

"I will not conceal that I have heard something just now which has
affected me very much," I said to her. "Will you step into my cabin? We
can talk there without being seen," I added, having observed Stevens
walk along the main-deck, and expecting that he would return in a few
moments to his cabin, it being his watch below.

She followed me in silence, and I closed the door.

"I will tell you in a few words," I at once began, "what I heard just
now. I told the boatswain that I questioned whether the men would let
me land with them for fear of the evidence I could give. He replied
that he had gathered from the carpenter, while at breakfast, that the
men intended to scuttle the ship when they quitted her, and to leave us
on board."

"To drown?"

"That is their idea."

She pursed up her mouth tightly, and pressed her hand to her forehead.
That was all. Whatever emotion my statement inspired was hidden. She
said in a low voice--

"They are fiends! I did not think them so cruel--my poor father!"

"This is what I am told they mean to do; and I know Stevens to be a
ruffian, and that he will carry out his project if he can. I have spent
some time alone here, in trying to think how we can save ourselves; as
yet I see no remedy. But wait," I said; "it will take us three weeks,
sailing well every day, to reach the Gulf of Mexico. I have this time
before me; and in that time not only something must, but something
shall be done."

She did not answer.

"I will hazard nothing. I will venture no risks; what I resolve to do
must be effectual," I went on, "because my life is dearer to me now
than it was three days ago, for your and your father's sake. You must
be saved from these ruffians, but no risk must attend your deliverance.
That is why I see no escape before us as _yet_; but it will come--it
will come! Despair is very fruitful in expedients, and I am not beaten
because I find myself flung like a dog in a hole!"

She looked up at this, and said, "What is to be done?"

"I must think."

"I will think, too. We need not tell papa?" she added, toning her voice
to a question, with an appealing look in her eyes.

"No, certainly not. Remember, we are not supposed to question the men's
honest intentions towards us. We must appear utterly ignorant."

"Are they armed?" she inquired.

"No."

She cast her eyes round the cabin and said, "Have you no guns?"

"Nothing but a pistol. But though we had twenty guns we have no hands
to use them. So far as I know as yet, there is no man who would stand
with me--not even the boatswain, unless he were sure we should conquer
the ruffians."

"Could I not use a pistol? Ah, I remember, you have only one."

She sank her chin on her hand and looked downwards, lost in thought.

"Why would you not steer the ship for some near port?" she asked
presently.

"I could not alter the course without being challenged. Remember that
my policy is not to excite suspicion of my honesty."

"If a gale would rise like that which wrecked the _Cecilia_, it might
drive us near the land, where we could get help."

"No, we shall have to depend upon ourselves. I do not want to pin my
faith on chance."

I began to pace to and fro, torn by the blind and useless labours of my
mind.

Just then a step sounded along the cuddy. The cabin door was pushed
open roughly, and Stevens walked in. He stared at Miss Robertson, and
cried--

"Sorry to interrupt. Didn't know you was here, mam, I'm sure. I
thought," addressing me, "I should find you turned in. I've come to
have a look at that chart o' yours. How long d'ye make it to New
Orleans?"

"About three weeks."

"Well, there's live stock enough for three weeks, any ways. I've just
told the cook to stick one of them porkers. All hands has a fancy for
roast pork to-day. Sarvant, miss. You was pretty nigh drownded, I
think."

"My father and I owe our lives to the noble fellows in this ship. They
must be brave and good men to risk their lives to save ours," she
answered, with a smile of touching sweetness, looking frankly into the
face of the miscreant who stood, cap on head, before her.

"Lor' bless yer!" he exclaimed; "there wasn't no risk. I'd ha' swum the
distance in such a sea for five shilling."

She shook her head with another smile (I judged the effort this piece
of acting cost her), as she said--

"I know that English sailors always undervalue their good deeds. But
happily my father is a rich man, and when you land us he will take care
that no man on board this ship shall complain of his gratitude."

"Oh, he's rich!" exclaimed the carpenter, as though struck with a new
idea.

"Very rich."

"How rich might he be, mam?"

"Well, he owned the ship that you saved us from--cargo and ship."

She could not have offered a better illustration of her father's wealth
to the man, for he would appreciate the value of a vessel of that size.

"And what do you think he'll give the men--them as saved him, I
suppose?"

"Oh, he won't make any difference. He is indebted to you all, for I
have heard that the captain would not have stopped for us had he not
been obliged to do so by the crew."

"That's true enough," rejoined the carpenter with an oath, looking at
me.

"Perfectly true," I made haste to say.

"My father would not certainly offer less than one hundred pounds to
each man," she said quite simply.

He pulled off his cap at this and twirled it and let it drop; picked it
up so slowly that I thought he would never bend his body sufficiently
to enable him to recover it; looked at her sideways as he put it on his
head again, and then said to me with offensive abruptness--

"Come, master, let's have a look at that blooming chart."

I opened the door to let Miss Robertson pass out, exchanging one glance
with her as she left, and addressed myself to the carpenter.

He pored over the chart with his dirty forefinger upon it.

"Whereabouts are we now?" he inquired.

I pointed to the spot as near as I could judge from yesterday's
reckonings.

"What's this here line?" he asked.

"That's the longitude."

He ran his eye to the bottom of the chart and exclaimed--

"Thirty. Is that it?"

"Call it thirty."

"But what do _you_ call it?"

"Thirty, I tell you--thirty degrees west longitude."

"And this here line's the latitude, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"That's forty."

"Call it forty-four."

"Will that make it right?"

"Pretty nearly."

"What are all these here dots and streaks?" said he, after squinting
with his nose close to the chart. "Blowed if ever I could read them
small words."

"They are the Azores."

"Oh, we're to the norrards o' them, aren't we?" he inquired sharply.

"You can see for yourself," I answered, putting my finger on the chart.

"Where's this blessed Gulf of Mexico?" he inquired, after casting his
eyes all over the chart.

"There."

He ran his dirty thumbnail in a line to the the Gulf, and asked me what
that blot was.

"Bermuda."

"You'll keep south o' that, will yer?"

"If I can, certainly."

"It's a man-o'-war station, I've heerd."

"I believe it is."

"All right," he said, and looking at the boat's compass on the table,
asked if it were true.

I told him it was; whereupon he set it on the chart and compared its
indications with the line he had run down the chart, and was going
away, when I said--

"What do you think of the young lady's idea? I should like to earn a
hundred pounds."

"So should I," he answered gruffly, pausing.

"It would pretty well pay me for what I have had to put up with from
Coxon."

He gave me an indescribable look, full of fierceness, suspicion, and
cunning.

"I dessay it would, if you got it," he said, and walked out, banging
the door after him.




CHAPTER III.


I had been greatly struck by the firmness with which Miss Robertson
had received the ghastly bit of information I gave her, and not more
by this than by her gentle and genial manner towards the carpenter,
wherein she had shown herself perfectly well qualified to act with me
in this critical, dangerous time. She had only just been rescued from
one trial frightful enough in character to have driven one, at least,
of the male sufferers mad; and now fate had plunged her into a worse
situation, and yet she could confront the terrors of it calmly, and
deliberate collectedly upon the danger.

Such a character as this was, I thought, of the true type of heroine,
with nothing in it that was strained; calm in emergency, and with a
fruitful mind scattering hope around it--even though no more than
hope--as the teeming flower sheds its perfume. I had especially noticed
the quickness with which she had conceived and expressed that idea
about her father rewarding the men; it inspirited me, in spite of the
reception Stevens had given it. One hundred pounds a man was a promise
that might move them into a very different train of thought from what
Stevens had induced and was sustaining.

Having heard the carpenter enter his cabin, I determined to step on
deck and take the boatswain's sense on this new idea. But before
quitting the cuddy, I knocked lightly on Miss Robertson's cabin door.

She opened it instantly.

"Will you come on deck?" I asked her.

"Yes, if I can be of use there."

"The air will refresh you after your confinement to this cabin, and
will do your father good."

"He is sleeping now," she answered, opening the door fully, that I
might see the old man.

"Let him sleep," said I; "that will do him more good. But you will
come?"

"Yes, with pleasure."

"You have nothing to fear from the men," I said, wishing to reassure
her. "They are willing to acknowledge the authority of the persons they
have put over them--the bo'sun, Stevens, and myself."

"I should not mind if they spoke to me," she exclaimed. "I should know
what to say to them, unless they were brutal."

She suddenly added, putting her hand to her head, and almost laughing--

"I have no hat."

"I have a straw hat you shall have," I said, and brought it.

She put it on her head, and it sat very well on the pile of yellow hair
that lay heaped over her comb.

"How strange," she said, speaking in the whisper in which our
conversation had been carried on, "to find oneself destitute,--without
even the commonest necessaries! When the captain of the _Cecilia_ said
we were sinking, papa ran with me out of the cabin. We did not think of
putting on our hats, nor of saving anything but our lives."

She turned to look at her father, closed the door tenderly, and
accompanied me on deck.

The morning was now advanced. The day was still very bright; and
the wonderful blue of the heavens lost nothing of its richness from
contrast with the stately and swelling clouds--pearl-coloured where
they faced the sun, and with here and there a rainbow on their skirts,
and centres of creamy white--which sailed solemnly over it.

The breeze had freshened, but the swell had greatly subsided, and the
sea was almost smooth, with brilliant little waves chasing it. The ship
was stretching finely along the water, all sail set and every sail
drawing.

On our lee beam was the canvas of a big ship, her hull invisible; and
astern of her I could just make out the faint tracing of the smoke of a
steamer upon the sky. The sun shone warm, but not too warm; the strong
breeze was sweet and soft; the ship's motion steady, and her aspect a
glorious picture of white and rounded canvas, taut rigging delicately
interlaced, and gleaming decks and glittering brass-work. The blue
water sang a racing chorus at the bows, and the echo died upon the
broad and bubbling wake astern.

I ran my eye forwards upon the men on the forecastle. Most of the crew
were congregated there, lounging, squatting, smoking--no man doing any
work. I wondered, not at this, but that they should be so orderly and
keep their place. They might have come aft had they pleased, swarmed
into the cuddy, occupied the cabins; for the ship was theirs. Since
they acted with so much decency, could they not be won over from their
leader's atrocious project? If I went among them, holding this girl,
now at my side, by the hand, and pleaded for her life, if not for my
own, would they not spare her? would not some among them be moved by
her beauty and her helplessness?

Nothing should seem more rational than such conjectures, always
providing that I ceased to remember these men were criminals, that
their one idea now was to elude the law, and that I who should plead,
and those for whom I pleaded, could by a word, when set on shore,
procure the conviction of the whole gang, charge them with their
crimes, prove their identity, and secure their punishment. Would not
Stevens keep them in mind of this? Knowing what they knew, knowing what
they meditated, I say that in the very orderliness of their behaviour,
I witnessed something more sinister than I should have found in violent
conduct. I alone could carry them to where they wished to go. I must be
conciliated, pleased, obeyed, and my fears tranquillized. If I failed
them, their doom was inevitable; shipwreck or capture was certain. All
this was plain to me as the fingers on my hand; and during the brief
time I stood watching them, I found myself repeating again and again
the hopeless question, "What can I do?"

Miss Robertson seated herself on one of the skylights, that nearest the
break of the poop. The boatswain glanced at her respectfully, and the
men forward stared, and some of them laughed, but none of the remarks
they indulged in were audible.

Fish was at the wheel. I went to the binnacle, and said--

"That's our course. Let this wind hold, and we'll soon be clear of this
mess."

"Three weeks about, I gives us," answered the man.

"And long enough, too," said I.

He spat the quid in his mouth overboard, and dried his lips on his
cuff. As he did not seem disposed to talk, I left him and joined the
boatswain, and at my request he came and stood with me near Miss
Robertson.

"I have told this lady what you repeated to me at breakfast," I said,
in a low voice. "She is full of courage, and I have asked her to come
on deck that we may talk before her."

"If she's as brave as she's pretty, I reckon not many 'll carry stouter
hearts in 'em than her," he said, addressing her full, with an air of
respectful gallantry that was very taking.

She looked down with a smile.

"Boatswain," said I, "every hour is precious to us, for at any moment
Stevens may change the ship's course for a closer shore than the
American; and though we should hold on for the Gulf, it may take us all
our time to hit on a scheme to save ourselves and work it out. I have
come to tell you an idea suggested by this lady, Miss Robertson. Her
father is a rich man, owner of the vessel he was wrecked in----"

"Robertson and Co., of Liverpool, ship-brokers?" he interrupted,
addressing her.

"Yes," she replied.

"Why, I sailed in one o' that firm's wessels as bo'sun's mate, three
year ago, the _Albany_ she was called, and a werry comfortable ship she
was, well found and properly commanded."

"Indeed!" she exclaimed, brightening up and looking at him eagerly.
And then, reflecting a little, she said--"The _Albany_--that ship was
commanded by Captain Tribett."

"Quite right, miss, Tribett was the name. And the first mate's name
was Green, and the second's Gull, and the third--ah! he were Captain
Tribett's son,--same name of course. Well, blow me if this ain't wot
the Italians calls a cohincidence."

He was as pleased as she, and stood grinning on her.

"Mr. Royle," she exclaimed, raising her fine eyes to mine, "surely
there must be others like the boatswain in this ship. They cannot all
be after the pattern of that horrible carpenter!"

"We ought to be able to find that out, bos'un," I said.

"Look here, miss," he answered, with a glance first at the men forward
and then at Fish at the wheel, "the circumstances of this here affair
is just this: the crew have been very badly treated, fed with rotten
stores, and starved and abused by the skipper and chief mate until they
went mad. I don't think myself that they meant to kill the captain and
Mr. Duckling; but it happened, and no man barrin' Stevens was guiltier
than his mate, and that's where it is. The carpenter knocked the
skipper down, and others kicked him when he was down, not knowing he
was dead; and four or five set on Mr. Duckling, and so you see it's
a sin as they all share alike in. If one man had killed the skipper,
and another man had killed the chief mate, why then so be, miss, the
others might be got to turn upon 'em to save their own necks. But here
it's all hands as did the job. And the only man who kept away, though
I pretended to be one with 'em hearty enough, was me; and wot's the
consequince. Stevens don't trust me; and I'm sartin in my own mind that
he don't mean to let me into the boats when the time comes, any more
than you."

So saying, he deliberately walked aft, looked at the compass, then at
the sails, and patrolled the poop for several minutes, for the very
obvious reason that the men should not take notice of our talking long
and close together.

Presently he rejoined us, standing a little distance away, and in a
careless attitude.

"Bo'sun," said I, addressing him with my eyes on the deck, so that from
a distance I would not appear to be speaking, "Miss Robertson told
Stevens that her father would handsomely reward every man on board this
ship on her arrival in port. He asked her what her father would give,
and she said a hundred pounds to each man. If this were repeated to the
crew, what effect would it produce?"

"They wouldn't believe it."

"My father would give each man a promise in writing," she exclaimed.

"They wouldn't trust him," said the boatswain, without reflecting.
"They'd think it a roose to bring 'em together to give 'em into
custody. If I was one of them that's what I should think, and you may
be sure I'm right."

"But he would give them written orders on his bankers; they could not
think it a ruse," she said eagerly, evidently enamoured of her own
idea, since she saw that I entertained it.

"Sailors don't no nothing about banks and the likes of that, miss.
There are thirteen men in the ship's company, counting the cook and
the steward. Call 'em twelve. If your father had a bag of sovereigns
on board this wessel, and counted out a hundred to each man, then
they'd believe him. But I'd not believe _them_. They'd take the money
and scuttle the ship all the same. Don't make no mistake. They're fond
o' their wagabone lives, and the carpenter's given 'em such a talkin'
to, that they're precious keen on gettin' away and cuttin' off all
evidence. It 'ud take more than a hundred pound each man to make 'em
willing to risk their lives."

He walked away once more and stood lounging aft, chatting with Fish.

"I am afraid the bo'sun is right," said I. "Having lived among them and
heard their conversation, he would know their characters too well to be
deceived in the consequences of your scheme."

"But papa would pay them, Mr. Royle. He would give them any pledge they
might choose to name, that they would run no risk. The money could be
sent to them--they need not appear--they need not be seen."

"We know they would run no risks; but could we get them to believe us?"

"At least let us try."

"No--forgive me--we must not try. We must have nothing more to say. You
have spoken to Stevens; let _him_ talk among the men. If the reward
tempt them, be sure they will concert measures among themselves to land
you. But I beg you to have no faith in this project. They are villains,
who will betray you in the end. The boatswain's arguments respecting
them are perfectly just--so just that he has inspired me with a new
kind of faith in him. He owns that his own life is in jeopardy, and I
believe he will hit upon some expedient to save us. See how he watches
us! He will join us presently. I, too, have a scheme dawning in my
head, but too imperfect to discuss as yet. Courage!" I said, animated
by her beauty and the deep, speaking expression of her blue eyes: "the
bo'sun's confession of his own danger makes me feel stronger by a man.
I have greater confidence in him than I had. If I could but muster a
few firearms--for even the steward might be made a man of, fighting
for his life with a revolver in his hand--there is nothing I would not
dare. But twelve to two!--what is our chance? It must not be thought
of, with you and your father depending for your lives on ours."

"No," she answered firmly. "There must be other and better ways. I will
think as well as you."

The boatswain came sauntering towards us. He flung a coil of rope over
a belaying-pin, looked over the ship's side, approached us nearer, and
pulled out a pipe and asked me for a light. I had one in my pocket and
gave it to him. This was his excuse to speak.

"It isn't so suspicious lookin' to talk now as it would be at night
or in the cuddy--and in the cuddy there's no telling whose ears are
about," he said. "I'll give you my scheme, thought on since breakfast,
and listen close, for I durstn't talk much; after this we must belay,
or the men 'll be set jawing. When we come to the Gulf of Mexico,
you'll let me know how long it'll be afore we're fifty mile off the
Mississippi. I helped to stow the cargo in this vessel, and she's
choke full, and there's only one place as they'll be able to get at to
scuttle her, and that's right forrards of the fore hatch. I'll let that
out to Stevens bit by bit, in an ordinary way, and he'll remember it.
The night afore we heave to--you'll tell me when--I'll fall overboard
and get drowned. That'll happen in your watch. We'll get one o' them
packin' cases full o' tin-tack up out o' the steerage and stow it away
in one of the quarter-boats, and you'll let that drop overboard, d'ye
see? which 'll sound like a man's body, and sink right away, and then
you'll roar out that the boatswain's fallen overboard. Let 'em do
what they like. I shall be stowed away forrard, down in the forepeak
somewheers, and the man as comes there to bore a hole, _I'll choke_.
Leave the rest to me. If Stevens he sings out to know if it's done,
I'll say 'Yes,' and tell him to lower away the boats, and hold on for
me. He'll take my voice for the fellow as is scuttling the ship. Now,"
he added vehemently, "I'll lay any man fifty pound agin ten shillings,
that Stevens don't wait for the man he sends below. He'll get into the
boat and shove off and lay by. You'll give me the signal, and I'll
come up sharp, an' if there's a breath o' air we'll have the mainyards
round somehow; and if the boats get in our road we'll run 'em down; and
if there's no wind, and they try to board us--let 'em look out! for
there'll be more blood-letting among 'em than ever they saw before, by
God!"

He motioned with his hand that we should leave the poop, and walked
away.

Miss Robertson looked at me and I at her for some moments in silence.

"Will it do, Mr. Royle?" she asked, in a low voice.

"Yes," I said.

"You think we shall be saved by this stratagem?"

I reflected before answering, and then said, "I do."

She went down the companion-ladder, and when we were in the cuddy, she
took my hand in both of hers, and pressed it tightly to her heart, then
hurried into her cabin.




CHAPTER IV.


The more I considered the boatswain's proposal, the better I liked
it. All that day I turned it over and over in my mind. And, what was
useful to me, I could sleep when I lay down in my watches below, which
was a luxury I had feared, after the boatswain's disclosure at the
breakfast-table, would be denied me.

I did not wish Miss Robertson to sit at the cuddy table at meal hours,
and when dinner-time came I took care that as good a meal should be
taken to her and her father as the ship could furnish.

When Stevens joined me at the table, he sang out to the steward to
"tell the old gent an' his darter that dinner vos a vaitin'!" Whereupon
I explained that the old gentleman was too ill to leave his bunk.

"Well, then, let the gal come," said he.

"She can't leave her father," I replied.

"Perhaps it ain't that so much as because I ain't genteel enough for
her. It's the vest end o' London as won't have nothen to do with
Wapping. The tobaccy in my breath's too strong for her."

"Nothing of the kind. The old man is ill, and she must watch him. As to
your manners, I dare say she is better pleased with them than you ought
to be told. It is not every ship's carpenter that could talk and look
like a skipper, and keep men under as you do."

"You're right there!" he exclaimed, with a broad grin. "Come, sarve us
out a dollop o' that pork, will yer? Roast pork's never too fresh for
me."

And he fell like an animal to the meat, and forgot, as I wished, all
about Miss Robertson.

In the first watch, from eight in the evening until midnight, which was
the boatswain's, I went and sat for an hour with the old gentleman and
his daughter. Not a word was said about the peril we were in; he was
quite ignorant of it, and, being better and stronger, was eager in his
questions about the ship's progress.

I took notice that he appeared to forget all about the mutiny, and
conversed as if I were captain. Nor did he show any strong recollection
of the loss of his ship and the circumstances attending it. Indeed,
it seemed that as he grew better his memory grew worse. _That_ was
the faculty injured by his sufferings, and when I listened to his
questions, which took no cognizance of things of the past, though
as recent as yesterday, I thought his memory would presently quit
him wholly, for he was an old man, with a mind too feeble to hold on
tightly.

I left them at half-past nine, and went on deck. I tried to see who was
at the wheel, but could not make the man out. I think it was one of the
Dutchmen. Better this man than Fish, Johnson, or some of the others,
whose names I forget, who were thick with the carpenter, and before
whom it would not be wise to talk with any suggestion of mystery with
the boatswain.

However, there was not much chance of my being noticed, for the night
was gloomy, and all about the decks quite dark. The ship was under
topsails and main top-gallant sail; the wind was east-south-east,
blowing freshly, with long seas. There was no appearance of foul
weather, and the glass stood steady; but an under-sky of level cloud
lay stretched across the stars; and looking abroad over the ship's
side, nothing was distinguishable but the foam of the waves breaking as
they ran.

As I emerged from the companion, the boatswain hailed the forecastle,
and told the man there to keep a good look-out. I had not had an
opportunity of speaking to him since the morning. I touched him on the
arm, and he turned and stared to see who I was.

"Ah, Mr. Royle," said he.

"Let's get under the lee of that quarter-boat," said I. "We can hear
each other there. Who's at the wheel?"

"Dutch Joe."

"Come to the binnacle first, and I'll talk to you about the ship's
course, and then we'll get under the quarter-boat, and he'll think I am
giving you sailing directions."

We did this, and I gave the boatswain some instructions in the hearing
of the Dutchman; and to appear very much in earnest, the boatswain and
I hove the log whilst Dutch Joe turned the glass, which he could easily
attend to, holding a spoke with one hand, for the ship was steering
herself.

We then walked to the quarter-boat and stood under the lee of it.

"Bo'sun," said I, "the more I think of your scheme, the better I like
it. Whatever may happen, your being in the hold will prevent any man
from scuttling the ship."

"Yes, so it will; I'll take care of that. One blow must do the job--he
mustn't cry out. The pianofortes are amidships on nearly two foot of
dunnage; all forrard the cases run large, and it's there they'll find
space."

"My intention is not to wait until we come to the Gulf in order to
carry this out," said I; "I'll clap on sixty, eighty, a hundred miles,
just as I see my way, to every day's run, so as to bring the Gulf of
Mexico close alongside the Bermuda Islands. Do you understand, bo'sun?"

"Yes, I understand. There's no use in waitin'. You're quite right to
get it over. The sooner the better, says I."

"We shall average a run of 300 miles every twenty-four hours, and I'll
slip in an extra degree whenever I can. Who's to know?"

"Ne'er a man on this wessel, sir," he answered. "There's not above two
as can spell words in a book."

"So I should think. Of course I shall have to prick off the chart
according to the wind. A breeze like this may well give us three
hundred miles. If it fall calm I can make her drift sixty miles
west-sou'-west, and clap on another eighty for steerage way. I shall
have double reckonings--one for the crew, one for myself. You, as chief
mate, will know it's all right."

"Leave that to me," he answered, with a short laugh. "They've found out
by this time that the ship's a clipper, and I'll let 'em understand
that there never was a better navigator than you. It 'll be for you and
me to keep as much canvas on her as she'll carry in our watches, for
the sake of appearance; and if I was you, sir, I'd trim the log-line
afresh."

"A good idea," said I. "I'll give her a double dose. Twelve knots shall
be nothing in a moderate breeze."

We both laughed at this; and then, to make my presence on deck appear
reasonable, I walked to the binnacle.

I returned and said--

"In nine days hence we must contrive to be in longitude 62° and
latitude 33°;--somewhere about it. If we can average 180 miles every
day we shall do it."

"What do you make the distance from where we are now to the Gulf?"

"In broad numbers, three thousand miles."

"No more?"

"Averaging two hundred miles a day we should be abreast of New Orleans
in a fortnight. I said three weeks, but I shall correct myself to
Stevens to-morrow, after I have taken observations. I'll show him a
jump on the chart that will astonish him. I'll punish the scoundrels
yet. I'll give them the direct course to Bermuda when they're in the
boats, and if our plot only succeeds and the wind serves, one of us two
will be ashore on the island before them, to let the governor know whom
he is to expect."

"That may be done, too," answered the boatswain; "but it'll have to be
a dark night to get away from 'em without their seeing of us."

"They'll choose a dark night for their own sakes. Boatswain, give us
your hand. Your cleverness has in my opinion as good as saved us. I
felt a dead man this morning, but I never was more alive, thanks to
you, than I am now."

I grasped his hand, and went below, positively in better spirits that I
had enjoyed since I first put my foot upon this ill-fated ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first thing I did next morning was to mark off the log-line
afresh, having smuggled the reel below during my watch. I shortened
the distances between the knots considerably, so that a greater number
should pass over the stern whilst the sand was running than would be
reeled off if the line were true.

At eight bells, when the boatswain went on deck, I asked him to
take the log with him; and following him presently, just as Stevens
was about to leave the poop, I looked around me, as if studying the
weather, and exclaimed--

"Bos'un, you must keep the log going, please. Heave it every hour,
never less. I may have to depend upon dead-reckoning to-day, Mr.
Stevens;" and I pointed to the sky, which was as thick as it had been
all night.

"Shall I heave it now?" inquired the boatswain.

"Did you heave it in your watch, Mr. Stevens?" said I.

"No," he replied. "What are we doin' now? This has been her pace all
along--ha'n't touched a brace or given an order since I came on deck."

He had come on deck to relieve me at four.

"Let's heave the log," I exclaimed; "I shall be better satisfied."

I gave the glass to Stevens, and whilst arranging the log-ship, I
looked over the side, and said--

"By Jove, she's walking and no mistake."

"I allow that we're doing ten," said the man at the wheel.

"I give her thirteen good," said I.

"Call it fifteen, and you'll not be far out," observed the boatswain.

The carpenter cocked his evil eye at the water, but hazarded no
conjecture.

"She _can_ sail--if she can't do nothen else," was all he said.

I flung the log-ship overboard.

"Turn!" I cried out.

I saw the knots fibbing out like a string of beads. The reel roared in
the boatswain's hands, and when Stevens called "Stop!" I caught the
line and allowed it to jam me against the rail, as though the weight of
it, dragged through the water at the phenomenal speed at which we were
supposed to be going, would haul me overboard.

"What's that knot there, Mr. Stevens?" I called out. "Bear a hand! the
line is cutting my fingers in halves!"

He put down the sand-glass and laid hold of the line where the knot
was, and began to count.

"Fifteen!" he roared.

"Well, I'm jiggered!" exclaimed the man steering.

I looked at Stevens triumphantly, as though I should say, "What do you
think of that?"

"I told you you wur wrong, Mr. Royle," said the boatswain. "It's all
fifteen. By jingo! it ain't sailing, it's engine drivin'!"

The true speed of the _Grosvenor_ was about nine and a half
knots--certainly not more; and whether the carpenter should believe the
report of the log or not, was nothing to me.

"Log it fifteen on the slate, bo'sun, and keep the log going every
hour," I said, and went below again.

I saw, as was now my regular custom at every meal, that the steward
took a good breakfast to the Robertsons' cabin, and then sat down with
Stevens to the morning repast.

I took this opportunity of suggesting that if the wind held, and the
vessel maintained her present rate of speed, we might hope to be in the
Gulf of Mexico in a fortnight.

"How do you make that out? It was three weeks yesterday."

"And it might have been a month," I answered. "But a few days of this
kind of sailing, let me tell you, Mr. Stevens, make a great difference
in one's calculations."

"How fur off is the Gulf of Mexico?" he asked.

"About a couple of thousand miles."

"Oh, a couple of thousand miles. Well, an' what reckoning do you get
out o' that?"

"Suppose you put the ship's pace down at thirteen knots an hour?"

"I thought you made it fifteen?" he exclaimed, looking at me
suspiciously.

"Yes, but I don't suppose we shall keep that up. For the sake of
argument I call it thirteen?"

"Well?" cramming his mouth as he spoke.

"In twenty-four hours we shall have run a distance of three hundred and
twelve miles."

He nodded.

"Therefore, if we have the luck to keep up this pace of two knots
less than we are now actually doing, for fifteen days, we shall have
accomplished--let me see."

I drew out a pencil, and commenced a calculation on the back of an old
envelope.

"Three hundred and twelve multiplied by fifteen. Five times naught
are naught; three naughts and two are ten; add two thousand; we shall
have accomplished a distance of four thousand six hundred and eighty
miles--that is two thousand six hundred and eighty miles further than
we want to go."

He was puzzled (and well he might be) by my fluent figures, but would
not appear so.

"I understand," said he.

"Stop a bit," I exclaimed; "I want to show you something."

I entered the captain's cabin, procured a chart of the North and South
Atlantic, including the eastern American coast, and spread it upon the
table.

"The two thousand miles I have given you," said I, "would bring you
right off the Mississippi. See here."

He rose and stooped over the chart.

"The short cut to the Gulf," I continued, pointing with my pencil,
"is through the Florida Channel, clean through the Bahamas, where the
navigation is very ugly."

"I see."

"I wouldn't trust myself there without a pilot on any consideration,
and, of course," said I, looking at him, "we don't want a pilot."

"I should rayther think we don't," he answered, scowling at the chart.

"So," I went on, "to keep clear of ships and boats, which are sure
to board us if we get among these islands, I should steer round
the Caribees, do you see?--well away from them, and up through the
Caribbean Sea, into the Gulf. Do you follow me?"

"Yes, yes--I see."

"Now, Mr. Stevens," said I very gravely, "I want to do my duty to the
crew, and put them and myself in the way of getting ashore and clear
off from all bad consequences."

The scoundrel tried to meet my eyes, but could not; and he listened to
me, gazing the while on the chart.

"But I don't think I should succeed if I got among those islands
blocking up the entrance of the Gulf; and as to the Gulf itself, you
may take your oath it's full of ships, some of which will pick you up
before you reach the shore, whilst others are pretty certain to come
across the vessel you have abandoned, and then--look out!"

He swallowed some coffee hastily, stared at the chart, and said in a
surly voice, "What are you drivin' at?"

"Instead of our abandoning the ship in the Gulf of Mexico," I said, "my
opinion is that, in order to assure our safety, and lessen the chance
of detection, we ought to abandon her clear of these islands, to the
norrard of them, off this coast here--Florida," pointing to the chart.

"You think so?" he said, doubtfully, after a long pause.

"I am certain of it. We ought to land upon some uninhabited part of the
coast, travel along it northwards, until we reach a town, and there
represent ourselves as shipwrecked sailors. Ask your mates if I am not
right."

"Perhaps you are," he replied, still very dubious, though not speaking
distrustfully.

"If you select the coast of Florida, clear of all these islands, and
away from the track of ships, I'll undertake, with good winds, to put
the ship off it in nine or ten days. But I'll not answer for our safety
if you oblige me to navigate her into the Gulf of Mexico."

He continued looking at the chart for some moments, and I saw by the
movements of his lips that he was trying to spell the names of the
places written on the Florida coast outline, though he would not ask me
to help him.

At last he said--

"It's Fish and two others as chose New Orleans. _I_ have no fancy for
them half-an'-half places. What _I_ wanted was to get away into the
Gulf of Guinea, and coast along down to Congo, or that way. I know that
coast, but I never was in Amerikey, and," he added, fetching the chart
a blow with his fist, "curse me if I like the notion of going there."

"It won't do to be shifting about," said I, frightened that he would go
and get the crew to agree with him to run down to the African coast,
which would seriously prolong the journey, and end, for all I could
tell, in defeating my scheme; "we shall be running short of water and
eatable stores, and then we shall be in a fix. Make up your mind, Mr.
Stevens, to the Florida coast; you can't do better. We shall fetch it
in a few days, and once ashore, we can disperse in parties, and each
party can tell their own yarn if they are asked questions."

"Well, I'll talk to Fish and the others about it," he growled, going
back to his seat. "I think you're right about them West Indie Islands.
We must keep clear o' them. Perhaps some of 'em forrards may know what
this here Florida is like. I was never ashore there."

He fell to his breakfast again, and finding him silent, and
considering that enough had been said for the present, I left him.

I did not know how well I had argued the matter until that night, when
he came to me on the poop, at half-past eight, and told me that the men
were all agreed that it would be too dangerous to abandon the ship off
New Orleans, and that they preferred the notion of leaving her off the
Florida coast.

I asked him if I was to consider this point definitely settled, and on
his answering in the affirmative, I sang out to the man at the wheel to
keep her away a couple of points, and ordered some of the watch to haul
in a bit on the weather braces, explaining to Stevens that his decision
would bring our course a trifle more westerly.

I then told him that, with a good wind, I would give the ship eight or
nine days to do the run in, and recommended him to let the crew know
this, as they must now turn to and arrange, not only how they should
leave the ship--in what condition, whether with their clothes and
effects, as if they had had time to save them, or quite destitute, as
though they had taken to the boats in a hurry--but also make up their
minds as to the character of the story they should relate when they got
ashore.

He answered that all this was settled, as, of course, I was very well
aware; but then my reason for talking to him in this strain was to
convince him that I had no suspicion of the diabolical project he was
meditating against my life.

You will, perhaps, find it hard to believe that he and the others
should be so ignorant of navigation as to be duped by my false
reckonings and misstatements of distances. But I can aver from
experience that merchant-seamen are, as a rule, as ignorant and
thick-headed a body of men as any in this world--and scarcely a
handful in every thousand with even a small acquaintance with the
theoretical part of their calling. More than a knowledge of practical
seamanship is not required from them; and how many are proficient even
in this branch? Of every ship's company more than half always seem to
be learning their business; furling badly, reefing badly, splicing,
scraping, painting, cleaning badly; turning to lazily; slow up aloft,
negligent, with an immense capacity of skulking.

I am persuaded that had I not shown Stevens the chart, I could have
satisfied him that a southerly course would have fetched the coast
of America. The mistake I made was in being too candid and honest
with them in the beginning. But then I had no plan formed. I dared
not be tricky without plausibility, and without some definite end to
achieve. Now that I had got a good scheme in my head, I progressed with
it rapidly, and I felt so confident of the issue, in the boatswain's
pluck and my own energy, that my situation no longer greatly excited my
apprehensions, and all that I desired was that the hour might speedily
arrive when the boats with their cargo of rascals and cowards should
put off and leave the ship.




CHAPTER V.


Having no other log-book than my memory to refer to, I pass over six
days, in which nothing occurred striking enough for my recollection to
retain.

This brought us to Sunday; and on that day at noon we were, as nearly
as I can recall, in 37° north latitude and 50° west longitude.

In round numbers Bermuda lies in latitude 32° and longitude 65°. This
is close enough for my purpose. We had consequently some distance yet
to run before we should _heave to off the coast of Florida_. But we had
for five days carried a strong following wind with us, and were now
(heading west by south half south) driving eight or nine knots an hour
under a fresh wind forward of the port beam.

I own I was very glad to be able to keep well to the norrard of 30°;
for had the north-east trade winds got hold of the ship, I should not
have been able to accommodate the distances run to my scheme so well as
I now could with shifting winds blowing sometimes moderate gales.

The crew continued to behave with moderation. The carpenter, indeed,
grew more coarse and offensive in manner as the sense of his importance
and of his influence over the men grew upon him; and there were times
when Johnson and Fish put themselves rather disagreeably forward; but I
must confess I had not looked for so much decency of behaviour as was
shown by the rest of the men in a crew who were absolute masters of the
vessel.

But all the same, I was not to be deceived by their apparent
tractableness and quiet exterior. I knew but too well the malignant
purpose that underlay this reposeful conduct, and never addressed
them but felt that I was accosting murderers, who, when the moment
should arrive, would watch their victims miserably drown, with horrid
satisfaction at the success of their cruel remedy to remove all chance
of their apprehension.

On this Sunday, old Mr. Robertson came on deck for the first time,
accompanied by his daughter, who had not before been on the poop in the
daytime.

It was my watch on deck; had it been the carpenter's, I should have
advised them to keep below.

What I had feared had now come to pass. Mr. Robertson's memory was
gone. He could recall nothing; but what was more pitiful to see,
though it was all for the best so far as he was concerned, he made no
effort to recollect. Nothing was suggestive; nothing, that ever I could
detect, put his mind in labour. His daughter spoke to me about this
melancholy extinction of his memory, but not with any bitterness of
sorrow.

"It is better," she said, "that he should not remember the horrors of
that shipwreck, nor understand our present dreadful position."

It was indeed the sense of our position that took her mind away from
too active a contemplation of her father's intellectual enfeeblement.
There was never a more devoted daughter, more tender, gentle,
unremitting in her foresight of his wants; and yet, in spite of
herself, the feeling of her helplessness would at times overpower her;
that strong and beautiful instinct in women which makes them turn for
safety and comfort to the strength of men whom they can trust, would
master her. I knew, I felt through signs touching to me as love, how
she looked to me out of her loneliness, out of the deeper loneliness
created in her by her father's decay, and wondered that I, a rough
sailor, little capable of expressing all the tenderness and concern
and strong resolutions that filled my heart, should have the power to
inspirit and pacify her most restless moods. In view of the death that
might await us--for hope and strive as we might, we could pronounce
nothing certain--it was exquisite flattery to me, breeding in me,
indeed, thoughts which I hardly noted then, though they were there to
make an epoch in my life, to feel her trust, to witness the comfort my
presence gave her, to receive her gentle whispers that she had no fear
now; that I was her friend; that she knew me as though our friendship
was of old, old standing!

I say, God bless her for her faith in me! I look back and know that I
did my best. She gave me courage, heart, and cunning; and so I owed my
life to her, for it was these things that saved it.

She exactly knew the plans concerted by the boatswain and myself, and
was eager to help us; but I could find no part for her.

However, this Sunday afternoon, whilst I stood near her, talking in a
low voice, her father sitting in a chair that I had brought from the
cuddy, full in the sun, whose light seemed to put new life into him--I
said to her with a smile--

"If to-night is dark enough, the boatswain must be drowned."

"Yes," she answered, "I know. It will not be too soon, you think?"

"No. I shall not be easy until I get him stowed away in the hold."

"You will see," she exclaimed, "that the poor fellow takes plenty to
eat and drink with him?"

"A good deal more than he wants is already there," I answered. "For the
last three days he has been dropping odds and ends of food down the
fore hatch. Let the worst come to the worst, he had smuggled in enough,
he tells me, to last him for a fortnight. Besides, the water-casks are
there."

"And how will he manage to sleep?"

"Oh, he'll coil up and snug himself away anyhow. Sailors are never
pushed for a bedstead: anything and everything serves. The only part
of the job that will be rather difficult is the drowning him. I don't
know anything that will make a louder splash and sink quickly too, than
a box of nails. The trouble is to heave it overboard without the man
at the wheel seeing me do it; and I must contrive to let him think that
the boatswain is aft, before I raise the splash, because if this matter
is not ship-shape and carried out cleverly, the man, whoever he may be
that takes the wheel, will be set thinking and then get on to talking.
Now, not the shadow of a suspicion must attend this."

"May I tell you how I think the man who is steering can be deceived?"

"By all means."

She fixed her eyes on the sea and said--

"I must ask some questions first. When you come on deck, will it be the
boatswain's or the carpenter's turn to go downstairs?"

"The carpenter's. He must be turned in before I move."

"And will the same man be at the wheel who steered the ship during the
carpenter's watch?"

"No. He will be relieved by a man out of the port watch."

"Now I understand. What I think is that the man who comes to take the
other one's place at the wheel ought to see the boatswain as he passes
along the deck. The boatswain should stand talking with you in full
sight of this man, that is, near the wheel, if the night is dark, so
that he can hear his voice, if he cannot distinguish his face; and when
all is quiet in the fore part of the ship, then you and he should walk
away and stand yonder," pointing, as she spoke, to the creak of the
poop.

I listened to her with interest and curiosity.

"Some one must then creep up and stand beside you, and the boatswain
must instantly slip away and hide himself. The case of nails ought
to be ready in one of those boats; you and the person who takes the
boatswain's place must then go to the boat, and one of you, under
pretence of examining her, must get the box of nails out on to the
rails ready to be pushed over-boards. Then the new-comer must crouch
among the shadows and glide away off the poop, and when he is gone you
must push the box over into the sea and cry out."

"The plot is perfect," I exclaimed, struck not more by its ingenuity
than the rapidity with which it had been conceived. "There is only one
drawback--who will replace the bo'sun? I dare not trust the steward."

"You will trust me?" she said.

I could not help laughing, as I exclaimed, "You do not look like the
bo'sun."

"Oh, that is easily done," she replied, slightly blushing, and yet
looking at me bravely. "If he will lend me a suit of his clothes, I
will put them on."

To spare her the slightest feeling of embarrassment, I said--

"Very well, Miss Robertson. It will be a little masquerading, that
is all. I will give you a small sou'wester that will hide your
hair--though even that precaution should be unnecessary, for if the
night is not dark, the adventure must be deferred."

"It is settled!" she exclaimed, with her eyes shining. "Come! I knew I
should be able to help. You will arrange with the boatswain, and let me
know the hour you fix upon, and what signal you will give me to steal
up on deck and place myself near you."

"You are the bravest girl in the world! you are fit to command a ship!"
I exclaimed.

She smiled as she answered, "A true sailor's compliment, Mr. Royle."
Then with a sudden sigh and a wonderful change of expression, making
her beauty a sweet and graceful symbol of the ever-changing sea, she
cried, looking at her father--

"May God protect us and send us safely home! I dare not think too much.
I hope without thinking. Oh, Mr. Royle, how shall you feel when we are
starting for dear England? This time will drive me mad to remember!"




CHAPTER VI.


I shall never forget the deep anxiety with which I awaited the coming
on of the night, my feverish restlessness, the exultation with which I
contemplated my scheme, the miserable anguish with which I foreboded
its failure.

It was like tossing a coin--the cry involving life or death!

If Stevens detected the stratagem, my life was not worth a rushlight,
and the thoughts of Mary Robertson falling a victim to the rage of the
crew was more than my mind could be got to bear upon.

Stevens came on deck at four o'clock in the afternoon, and that
I might converse with the boatswain without fear of incurring the
carpenter's suspicion, I brought a chart from the captain's cabin and
spread it on the cuddy table, right under the after skylight, and
whilst the boatswain and I hung over it, pretending to be engaged in
calculations, we completed our arrangements.

He was struck with the boldness of Miss Robertson's idea, and said he
would as soon trust her to take part in the plot as any stout-hearted
man. He grinned at the notion of her wearing his clothes, and told me
he'd make up a bundle of his Sunday rig, and leave it out for me to put
into her cabin.

"She'll know how to shorten what's too lengthy," said he; "and you'd
better tell her to take long steps ven she walks, for vimmen's legs
travels twice as quick as a man's, and that's how I alvays knows vich
sex is hacting before me in the theaytre, though, to be sure, some
o' them do dress right up to the hammer, and vould deceive their own
mothers."

"Are the hatches off forrard?"

"You leave that to me, Mr. Royle. That'll be all right."

"What weapon have you got?"

"Only a bar of iron the size of my leg," he answered, grimly. "I
shouldn't like to drop it on my foot by accident."

We brought our hurried conversation to a close by perceiving the
carpenter staring at us stedfastly through the skylight; and whispering
that everything now depended upon the night being dark, I repaired with
my chart to the cabin I occupied.

I noticed at this time that the lid of one of the lockers stood a
trifle open, sustained by the things inside it, which had evidently
been tumbled and not put square again.

This, on inspecting the locker, I found to be the case; and remembering
that here was the bag of silver I had come across while searching for
clothes for old Mr. Robertson, I thrust my hand down to find it. It was
gone. "So, Mr. Stevens," thought I, "this is some of your doing, is it?
A thief as well as a murderer! You grow accomplished." Well, if he had
the silver in his pocket when he quitted the ship, it would only drown
him the sooner, should he find himself overboard. There was comfort in
that reflection, any way; and I should have been perfectly willing that
the silver had been gold, could the rogue's death have been hastened by
the transmutation.

A little before six o'clock, at which hour I was to relieve the
boatswain in order to take charge of the ship through the second
dog-watch, Stevens being in his cabin and all quiet in the after part
of the vessel, I went quietly down the ladder that conducted to
the steerage, this ladder being situated some dozen feet abaft the
mizzen-mast.

All along the starboard side of the ship in this part of her were
stowed upwards of seven hundred boxes of tin-tacks, each box about
twice the breadth and length of this book in your hand, and weighing
pretty heavy. There was nothing else that I could think of that would
so well answer the purpose of making a splash alongside, as one of
these boxes, and which combined the same weight in so handy and
portable a bulk. Anything in wood must float; anything in iron might
be missed. All these things had to be carefully considered, for, easy
as the job of dropping a weight overboard to counterfeit the sound
of a human body fallen into the water may seem, yet in my case the
difficulty of accomplishing it successfully, and without the chance
of subsequent detection, was immense, and demanded great prudence and
foresight.

I conveyed one of these boxes to my cabin, and when four bells were
struck (the hands kept the relief bells going for their own sakes, I
giving them the time each day at noon), I smuggled it up in a topcoat,
and stepped with an easy air on to the poop. The man who had been
steering was in the act of surrendering the spokes to another hand, and
I took advantage of one of them cutting off a piece of tobacco for the
other, which kept them both occupied, to put my coat and the box inside
it in the stern sheets of the port quarter-boat, as though it were my
coat only which I had deposited there out of the road, handy to slip on
should I require it.

The boatswain observed my action without appearing to notice it; and as
he passed me on the way to the cuddy, he said that his clothes would
be ready by eight bells for the lady, and that I should find them in a
bundle near the door.

He would not stay to say more; for I believe that the carpenter had
found something suspicious in our hanging together over the chart, and
had spoken to this effect to his chums among the men; and it therefore
behoved the boatswain and me to keep as clear of each other as possible.

One stroke of fortune, however, I saw was to befall us. The night,
unless a very sudden change took place, would be dark.

The sky was thick, with an even and unbroken ground of cloud which had
a pinkish tint down in the western horizon, where the sun was declining
behind it. The sea was rough, and looked muddy. The wind held steady,
but blew very fresh, and had drawn a trifle further to the southwards,
so that the vessel was a point off her course. The motion of the ship
was very uncomfortable, the pitching sharp and irregular, and she
rolled as quickly as a vessel of one hundred tons would.

As the shadows gathered upon the sea, the spectacle of the
leaden-coloured sky and waves was indescribably melancholy. Some
half-dozen Mother Carey's chickens followed in our wake, and I watched
their grey breasts skimming the surface of the waves until they grew
indistinguishable on the running foam. The look of the weather was
doubtful enough to have justified me in furling the main top-gallant
sail and even single reefing the two topsails; but though this canvas
did not actually help the ship's progress, as she was close to the
wind, and it pressed her over and gave her much leeway, yet I thought
it best to let it stand, as it suggested an idea of speed to the men
(which I took care the log should confirm), and I should require to
make a long reckoning on the chart next day to prove to Stevens that we
were fast nearing the coast of Florida.

At eight o'clock I called Stevens, and saw him well upon deck before I
ventured to enter the boatswain's berth. I then softly opened the door,
and heard the honest fellow snoring like a trooper in his bunk; but
the parcel of clothes lay ready, and I at once took them, and knocked
lightly on Miss Robertson's door.

She immediately appeared, and I handed her the clothes and also my
sou'wester, which I had taken from my cabin after quitting the deck.

"What is to be the signal?" she asked.

"Three blows of my heel over your cabin. There is a spare cabin next
door for you to use, as your father ought not to see you."

"I will contrive that he does not see me," she answered. "He fell
asleep just now when I was talking to him. I had better not leave him,
for if he should wake up and call for me, I should not like to show
myself in these clothes for fear of frightening him; whereas if I stop
here I can dress myself by degrees and can answer him without letting
him see me."

"There is plenty of time," I said. "The bo'sun relieves the carpenter
at midnight. I will join the bo'sun when the carpenter has left the
deck. Here is my watch--you have no means of knowing the time without
quitting your cabin."

"Is the night dark?"

"Very dark. Nothing could be better. Have no fear," I said, handing her
my watch; "we shall get the bo'sun safely stowed below, and with him a
crow-bar. The carpenter will find it rather harder than he imagines to
scuttle the ship. He--I mean the bo'sun--is sound asleep, and snoring
like a field-marshal on the eve of glory. His trumpeting is wonderfully
consoling, for no man could snore like that who forbodes a dismal
ending of life."

I took her hand, receiving as I did so a brave smile from her hopeful,
pretty face, and left her.

Without much idea of sleeping, I lay down under a blanket, but fell
asleep immediately, and slept as soundly, if not as noisily, as the
boatswain, until eleven o'clock.

The vessel's motion was now easier; she did not strain, and was more on
an even keel, which either meant that the wind had fallen or that it
had drawn aft.

I looked through the porthole, to see if I could make anything of the
night, but it was pitch dark. I lighted a pipe to keep me awake,
and lay down again to think over our plot, and find, if I could, any
weakness in it, but felt more than ever satisfied with our plans. The
only doubtful point was whether the fellow who went down to scuttle
the ship would not get into the forepeak; but if the boatswain could
contrive to knock a hole in the bulkhead, he would have the man,
whether he got down through the forecastle or the fore-hatch; and this
I did not question he would manage, for he was very well acquainted
with the ship's hold and the disposition of the cargo.

I found myself laughing once when I thought of the fright the scoundrel
(whoever it might be) would receive from the boatswain--he would think
he had met the devil or a ghost; but I did not suppose the boatswain
would give him much time to be afraid, if he could only bring that
crow-bar, as big as his leg, to bear.

The sounds of eight bells being struck, set my heart beating rather
quickly, and almost immediately I heard Stevens' heavy step coming down
the companion-ladder.

I lay quiet, thinking he might look in, as it would better suit
my purpose to let him think me asleep. He went and roused out the
boatswain, and after a little the boatswain went on deck.

But Stevens did not immediately turn in. I cautiously abstracted the
key, and looked through the keyhole, and observed him bring out a
bottle of rum and a tumbler from the pantry, and help himself to a
stiff glass. He swallowed the fiery draught with his back turned upon
the main-deck, that the men, if any were about, should not see him; and
drying his lips by running his sleeve, the whole length of his arm,
over them, he replaced the bottle and glass, and went to his cabin.

This was now my time. There was nothing to fear from his finding me
on deck should he take it into his head to come up, since it was
reasonable that I, acting as skipper, should at any and all hours be
watching the weather, and noting the ship's course, more particularly
now, when we were supposed to be drawing near land.

Still, I left my cabin quietly, as I did not want him to hear me, and
sneaked up through the companion on tiptoe.

The night was not so pitch dark as I might have expected from the
appearance of it through the port-hole; but it was quite dark enough to
answer my purpose. For instance, it was as much as I could do to follow
the outline of the mainmast, and the man at the wheel and the wheel
itself, viewed from a short distance, were lumped into a blotch, though
there was a halo of light all around the binnacle.

The lamp that was alight in the cuddy hung just abaft the foremost
skylight, and I saw that it would be necessary to cover the glass. So I
stepped up to the boatswain, who stood near the mizzen-mast.

"Are you all ready, bo'sun?"

"All ready."

"Not afraid of the rats?" I said, with a laugh.

"No, nor wuss than rats," he replied. "Has the lady got my clothes on
yet? I _should_ like to see her."

"She'll come when we are ready. That light shining on the skylight must
be concealed. I don't want to put the lamp out, and am afraid to draw
the curtains for fear the rings should rattle. There's a tarpaulin in
the starboard quarter-boat, take and throw it over the skylight whilst
I go aft and talk to the fellow steering. Who is he?"

"Jim Cornish."

He found the tarpaulin, and concealed the light, whilst I spoke to the
man at the wheel about the ship's course, the look of the weather, and
so on.

"Now," said I, rejoining the boatswain, "come and take two or three
turns along the poop, that Cornish may see us together."

We paced to and fro, stopping every time we reached the wheel to look
at the compass.

When we were at the fore end of the poop I halted.

"Walk aft," I said, "and post yourself right in the way of Cornish,
that he shan't be able to see along the weather side of the poop."

I followed him until I had come to the part of the deck that was right
over Miss Robertson's cabin, and there struck three smart blows with
the heel of my boot, at the same time flapping my hands against my
breast so as to make Cornish believe that I was warming myself.

I walked to the break of the poop and waited.

In less time than I could count twenty a figure came out of the cuddy
and mounted the poop ladder, and stood by my side. Looking close into
the face I could see that it was rather too white to be a sailor's,
that was all. The figure was a man's, most perfectly so.

"Admirable!" I whispered, grasping her hand.

I posted her close against the screened skylight, that her figure might
be on a level with the mizzen-mast viewed from the wheel, and called to
the boatswain.

The tone of my voice gave him his cue. He came forward just as a man
would to receive an order.

"She is here," I said, turning him by the arm to where Miss Robertson
stood motionless. "For God's sake get forward at once! Lose no time!"

He went up to her and said--

"I'm sorry I can't see you properly, miss. If this wur daylight I
reckon you'd make a handsome sailor, just fit for the gals to go
dreamin' an' ravin' about."

With which, and waving his hand, the plucky fellow slipped off the poop
like a shadow, and I watched him glide along the main-deck until he
vanished.

"Now," whispered I to my companion, "the tragedy begins. We must walk
up and down that the man steering may see us. Keep on the left side of
the deck; it is higher than where I shall walk, and will make you look
taller."

I posted her properly, and we began to measure the deck.

Anxious as I was, I could still find time to admire the courage of this
girl. At no sacrifice of modesty--no, not even to the awakening of an
instant's mirth in me--was her noble and beautiful bravery illustrated.
Her pluck was so grand an expression of her English character, that no
emotion but that of profound admiration of her moral qualities could
have been inspired in the mind of any man who beheld her.

I took care not to go further than the mizzen-rigging, so that Cornish
should distinguish nothing but our figures; and after we had paraded
the deck awhile I asked her to stand near the quarter-boat in which I
had placed the box.

I then got on to the rail and fished out the box smartly, and stood it
on the rail.

"Keep your hand upon it," said I, "that it may not roll overboard."

With which I walked right up to Cornish.

"Does she steer steady?"

"True as a hair."

"I left my coat this afternoon in one of the quarter-boats. Have you
seen it?"

"No."

"Perhaps it's in the starboard-boat."

I pretended to search, and then drawing close to Miss Robertson, said
quickly--

"Creep away now. Keep close to the rail and crouch low. Get to your
cabin and change your dress. Roll the clothes you are wearing in a
bundle and hide them for the present."

She glided away on her little feet, stooping her head to a level with
the rail.

All was quiet forward--the main-deck deserted. I waited some seconds,
standing with my hand on the box, and then I shoved it right overboard.
It fell just as I had expected, with a thumping splash.

Instantly I roared out, "Man overboard! Down with your helm! The
bo'sun's gone!" and to complete the imposture I bounded aft, cut away a
life-buoy, and flung it far into the darkness astern.

Cornish obeyed me literally; put the helm right down, and in a few
moments the sails were shaking wildly.

"Steady!" I shouted. "Aft here and man the port main-braces! Bear a
hand! the bo'sun's overboard!"

My excitement made my voice resonant as a trumpet, and the men in both
watches came scampering along the deck. The shaking of the canvas, the
racing of feet, my own and the cries of the crew, produced, as you may
credit, a fine uproar. Of course I had foreseen that there would be no
danger in bringing the ship aback. The wind though fresh was certainly
not strong enough to jeopardize the spars; moreover, the sea had
moderated.

Up rushed the carpenter in a very short time, rather the worse, I
thought, for the dose he had swallowed.

"What's the matter! What the devil is all this?" he bellowed, lurching
from side to side as the ship rolled, for we were now broadside on.

"The bo'sun has fallen overboard!" I shouted in his ear; and I had need
to shout, for the din of the canvas was deafening.

"Do you say the bo'sun?" he bawled.

"Yes. What shall we do? is it too dark to pick him up?"

"Of course it is!" he cried, hoarse as a raven. "What do you want to
do? He's drownded by this time! Who's to find him? Give 'em the proper
orders, Mr. Royle!" and he vociferated to the men--"Do you want the
masts to carry away? Do you want to be overhauled by the fust wessel as
comes this road, and hanged, every mother's son of you, because the
bo'sun's fallen overboard?"

I stood to leeward gazing at the water and uttering exclamations to
show my concern and distress at the loss of the boatswain.

Stevens dragged me by the arm.

"Give 'em the proper orders, I tell ye, Mr. Royle!" he cried. "I say
that the bo'sun's drownded, and that no stopping the wessel will save
him. Sing out to the men, for the Lord's sake! Let her fill again, or
we're damned!"

"Very well," I replied with a great air of reluctance, and I advanced
to the poop-rail and delivered the necessary orders. By dint of
flattening in the jib-sheets and checking the main-braces, and brailing
up the spanker and rousing the foreyards well forward, I got the ship
to pay off. The carpenter worked like a madman, bawling all the while
that if the ship was dismasted all hands would certainly be hanged; and
he so animated the men by his cries and entreaties, that more work was
done by them in one quarter of an hour than they would have put into
treble that time on any other occasion.

It was now one o'clock, so it had not taken us an hour to drown the
boatswain, put the ship in irons, and get her clear again.

Stevens came off the main-deck on to the poop, greatly relieved in his
mind now that the sails were full and the yards trimmed, and asked me
how it happened that the boatswain fell overboard.

I replied, very gravely, that I had come on deck at eight bells, being
anxious to see what way the ship was making and how she was heading;
that remembering I had left an overcoat in one of the quarter-boats, I
looked, but could not find it; that I spoke to the boatswain, who told
me that he had seen the coat in the stern sheets of the quarter-boat
that afternoon, and got on to the poop-rail to search the boat; that
I had turned my head for a moment when I heard a groan, which was
immediately followed by a loud splash alongside, and I perceived that
the boatswain had vanished.

"So," continued I, "I pitched a life-buoy astern and sang out to put
the helm down; and I must say, Mr. Stevens, that I think we could have
saved the poor fellow had we tried. But you are really the skipper of
this ship, and since you objected I did not argue."

"There's no use sayin' we _could_ ha' saved him," rejoined Stevens,
gruffly. "I say we couldn't. Who's to see him in the dark? We should
have had to burn a flare for the boat to find us, and what with our
driftin' and their lumpin' about, missing their road, and doing no
airthly good, we should ha' ended in losin' the boat."

He did not notice the tarpaulin spread over the skylight, though I had
an explanation of its being there had he inquired the meaning of it.

He hung about the deck for a whole hour, though I had offered to take
the boatswain's watch, and go turn and turn about with him (Stevens),
and he had a long yarn with the man at the wheel, which I contrived
to drop in upon after awhile, and found Cornish explaining exactly
how the boatswain fell overboard, and corroborating my story in every
particular.

Thus laborious as my stratagem had been, it was, as this circumstance
alone proved, in no sense too laboured; for had not Cornish seen, with
his own eyes, the boatswain and myself standing near the boat just
before I gave the alarm, he would in all probability have represented
the affair in such a way to Stevens as to set him doubting my story,
and perhaps putting the men on to search the ship, to see if the
boatswain _was_ overboard.

He went below at two o'clock.

The sea fell calm, and the wind shifted round to the nor'ard and
westward, and was blowing a steady pleasant breeze at six bells. The
stars came out and the horizon cleared, and looking to leeward I beheld
at a distance of about four miles the outline of a large ship, which,
when I brought the binocular glasses to bear on her, I found under full
sail.

She was steering a course seemingly parallel with our own, and as I
watched her my brains went to work to conceive in what possible way I
could utilize her presence.

At all events, the first thing I had to do was to make sail, or she
would run away from us; so I at once called up the watch.

Whilst the men were at work the dawn broke, and by the clearer light
I perceived that the vessel was making a more westerly course than
we, and was drawing closer to us at every foot of water we severally
measured. She was a noble-looking merchantman, like a frigate with her
painted ports, with double topsail and top-gallant yards, and with
skysails set, so that her sails were a wonderful volume and tower of
canvas.

The sight of her filled me with emotions I cannot express. As to
signalling her, I knew that the moment the men saw me handling the
signal-halliards they would crowd aft and ask me what I meant to do.
I might indeed hail her if I could sheer the _Grosvenor_ close enough
alongside for my voice to carry; but if they failed to hear me or
refused to help, what would be my position? So surely as I raised my
voice to declare our situation, so surely would the crew drag me down
and murder me out of hand.

Presently Fish and Johnson came along the main-deck, and while Fish
entered the cuddy Johnson came up to me.

"Hadn't you better put the ship about?" he said. "You're running us
rather close. The men don't like it."

Seeing that no chance would be given me to make my peril known to the
stranger, I formed my resolution rapidly. I called out to the men--

"Johnson wants to 'bout ship. Yonder vessel can see that we are
making a free wind, and she'll either think we're mad or that there's
something wrong with us if we 'bout ship with a beam wind. Now just
tell me what I am to do."

"Haul us away from that ship--that's all we want," answered one of them.

At this moment the carpenter came running up the poop ladder, with
nothing on but his shirt and a pair of breeches.

"Hallo!" he called out fiercely; "what are you about? Do you want to
put us alongside!"

And he bawled out fiercely--"Port your helm! run right away under her
stern!"

"If you do that," I exclaimed, very anxious now to show how
well-intentioned I was, "you will excite her suspicions. Steady!" I
cried, seeing the ship drawing rapidly ahead; "bring her to again a
point off her course."

Stevens scowled at me, but did not speak.

The crew clustered up the poop ladder to stare at the ship, and I
caught some of them casting such threatening looks at me, that I wanted
no better hint of the kind of mercy I should receive if I played them
any tricks.

"Mr. Stevens," said I, "leave me to manage, and I'll do you no wrong.
That ship is making more way than we are, and we shall have her dead on
end presently. Then I'll show you what to do."

As I spoke, the vessel which we had brought well on the port-bow
hoisted English colours. The old ensign soared gracefully, and stood
out at the gaff-end.

"We must answer her," I exclaimed to the carpenter. "You had better
bend on the ensign and run it up."

I suppose he knew that there could be no mischievous meaning in the
display of this flag, for he obeyed me, though leisurely.

The ship, when she saw that we answered her, hauled her ensign down,
and after awhile, during which she sensibly increased the distance
between us, and had drawn very nearly stern on, hoisted her number.

"Run up the answering pennant," I exclaimed; "it will look civil any
way, and it means nothing."

I pointed out the signal to the carpenter, who hoisted it; but I could
see by his face that he meant to obey no more orders of this kind.

"Steady as she goes!" cried I, to the fellow steering. "A hand let go
the weather mizzen-braces and haul in some of you to leeward."

This manoeuvre laid the sails on the mizzen-mast aback; they at once
impeded our way, nor, being now right ahead of us, could the people on
board the ship see what we had done. The result was the vessel drew
away rapidly, I taking care to luff as she got to windward, so as to
keep our flying jib-boom in a direct line with her stern.

To judge by the way the men glanced at me and spoke to one another,
they evidently appreciated this stratagem: and Stevens condescended to
say, "That's one for her."

"Better than going about," I answered drily.

"They've hauled down them signals," he said, blinking the point I
raised by my remark.

"Yes. She doesn't mean to stop to ask any questions."

The end of this was that in about twenty minutes the ship was three or
four miles ahead of us; so not choosing to lose any more time, I swung
the mizzen-yards, and got the _Grosvenor_ upon her course again.

Stevens went below to put on his coat and cap and boots in order to
relieve me, for it was now four o'clock. The dawn had broken with
every promise of a fine day, and where the sun rose the sky resembled
frost-work, layer upon layer of high delicate clouds, ranged like scale
armour, all glittering with silver brightness and whitening the sea,
over which they hung with a pale, pearly light.

I was thoroughly exhausted, not so much from the want of rest as from
the excitement I had gone through. Still, I had a part to play before
I turned in; so I stuck my knuckles in my eyes to rub them open, and
waited for Stevens, who presently came on deck, having first stopped on
the main-deck to grumble to his crony Fish over his not having had a
quarter of an hour's sleep since midnight.

"I'm growed sick o' the sight o' this poop," he growled to me. "Sick o'
the sight o' the whole wessel. Fust part o' the woyage I was starved
for food. Now, with the skipper overboard, I'm starved for sleep. How
long are we going to take to reach Florida? Sink me if I shouldn't ha'
woted for some nearer coast had I known this woyage wur going to last
to the day o' judgment."

"If it don't fall calm," I answered, "I may safely promise to put you
off the coast of Florida on Friday afternoon."

He thrust his hands into his breeches' pockets, and stared aft.

"I am very much troubled about the loss of the bo'sun," said I.

"Are you?" he responded, ironically.

"He was a civil man and a good sailor."

"Yes; I dessay he was. But he's no use now."

"He deserved that we should have made an effort to save him."

"Well, you said that before, and I said no; and I suppose I know wot I
mean when I says no."

"But won't the crew think me a heartless rascal for not sending a boat
to the poor devil?" I demanded, pretending to lose my temper.

"The bo'sun was none so popular--don't make no mistake; he wasn't one
of----Hell seize me! where are you drivin' to, Mr. Royle? Can't you
let a drownded man alone?" he cried, with an outburst of passion. But
immediately he softened his voice, and with a look of indescribable
cunning, said, "Some of the hands didn't like him, of course; and some
did, and they'll be sorry. I am one of them as did, and would ha' saved
him if I hadn't feared the masts, and reckoned there'd be no use in the
boat gropin' about in the dark for a drownin' man."

"No doubt of that," I replied, in a most open manner. "You know the
course, Mr. Stevens? You might set the fore-topmast stun'-sail
presently, for we shall have a fine day."

And with a civil nod I left him, more than ever satisfied that my
stratagem was a complete success.

I bent my ear to Miss Robertson's cabin as I passed, to hear if she
were stirring; all was still; so I passed on to my berth, and turned in
just as I was, and slept soundly till eight o'clock.




CHAPTER VII.


I only saw Miss Robertson for a few minutes at breakfast-time.

The steward as usual carried their breakfast on a tray to the door, and
in taking it in she saw me and came forward.

"Is it all well?" she asked, quickly and eagerly.

"All well," I replied.

"He is in the hold," she whispered, "and no one knows?"

"He is in the hold, and the crew believe to a man that he is overboard."

"It is a good beginning," she exclaimed, with a faint smile playing
over her pale face.

"Thanks to your great courage! You performed your part admirably."

"There is that hateful carpenter watching us through the skylight,"
she whispered, without raising her eyes. "Tell me one thing before I
go--when will the ship reach the part she is to stop at?"

"I shall endeavour to make it Friday afternoon."

"The day after to-morrow!"

She clasped her hands suddenly and exclaimed with a little sob in her
voice, "Oh, let us pray that God will be merciful and protect us!"

I had no thoughts for myself as I watched her enter her cabin. The
situation was, indeed, a dreadful one for so sweet and helpless a woman
to be placed in. I, a rough, sturdy fellow, used to the dangers of the
sea, was scared at our position when I contemplated it. Truly might I
say that our lives hung by a hair, and that whether we were to live or
perish dismally would depend upon the courage and promptness with which
the boatswain and I should act at the last moment.

It was worse for me that I did not know the exact plans of the
mutineers.

I was aware that their intention was to scuttle the ship and leave her,
with us on board, to sink. But _how_ they would do this, I did not
know. I mean, I could not foresee whether they would scuttle the ship
whilst all the crew remained on board, stopping until they knew that
the vessel was actually sinking before taking to the boats, or whether
they would get into the boat, leaving one man in the hold to scuttle
the ship, and lying by to take him off when his work should have been
performed.

Either was likely; but one would make our preservation comparatively
easy; the other would make it almost impossible.

When I went on deck all hands were at breakfast. The carpenter quitted
the poop the moment I showed myself, and I was left alone, none of the
crew visible but the steersman.

The breeze was slashing, a splendid sailing wind; the fore-topmast
stun'-sail set, every sail round and hard as a drum skin, and the water
smooth; the ship bowled along like a yacht in a racing match. Nothing
was in sight all round the horizon.

I made sure that the carpenter would go to bed as soon as he had
done breakfast; but instead, about twenty minutes after he had left
the poop, I saw him walk along the main-deck, and disappear in the
forecastle.

After an interval of some ten minutes he reappeared, followed by
Johnson, the cook, and a couple of hands. They got upon the port side
of the long-boat, and presently I heard the fluttering and screaming of
hens.

I crossed the poop to see what was the matter, and found all four men
wringing the necks of the poultry. In a short time about sixteen hens,
all that remained, lay dead in a heap near the coop. The cook and
Johnson gathered them up, and carried them into the galley.

Soon after they returned, and clambered on to the top of the long-boat,
the cover of which they pitched off, and fell, each with a knife in his
hand, upon the pigs. The noise now was hideous. The pigs squealed like
human beings, but both men probably knew their work, for the screeching
did not last above five minutes.

The cook, with his face, arms, and breeches all bloody, flung the
carcases among the men, who had gathered around to witness the sport,
and a deal of ugly play followed. They tossed the slaughtered pigs
at each other, and men and pigs fell down with tremendous thuds, and
soon there was not a man who did not look as though he had been rolled
for an hour in the gutter of a shambles. Their hoarse laughter, their
horrible oaths, their rage not more shocking than their mirth, the
live men rolling over the dead pigs, their faces and clothes ghastly
with blood--all this was a scene which made one abhor oneself for
laughing at it, though it was impossible to help laughing sometimes.
But occasionally my mirth would be checked by a sudden spasm of terror,
when I caught sight of a fellow with an infuriate face, monstrous with
its crimson colouring, rush with his knife at another, and be struck
down like a ninepin by a dead pig hurled full at his head, before he
could deliver his blow.

The saturnalia came to an end, and the men cursing, growling,
groaning, and laughing--some reeling half stunned, and all panting for
breath--surged into the forecastle to clean themselves, while the cook
and Johnson carried the pigs into the galley.

I did not quite understand what this scene heralded, but had not long
to wait before it was explained.

In twos and threes after much delay, the men emerged and began to wash
the decks down. Two got into the long-boat and began to clean her out.
Then the carpenter came aft with Johnson, and I heard him swearing at
the steward. After a bit, Johnson came forth, rolling a cask of cuddy
bread along the deck; after him went the steward, bearing a lime-juice
jar, filled of course with rum.

These things were stowed near the foremast. Then all three came aft
again (the carpenter superintending the work), and more provisions were
taken forward; and when enough was collected, the whole was snugged and
covered with a tarpaulin, ready, as I now understood, to be shipped
into the long-boat when she should have been swung over the ship's side.

These preparations brought the reality of the position of myself and
companions most completely home to me; yet I perfectly preserved my
composure, and appeared to take the greatest interest in all that was
going forward.

The carpenter came on the poop presently, and went to the starboard
quarter-boat and inspected it. He then crossed to the other boat. After
which he walked up to me.

"How many hands," he asked, "do you think the long-boat 'ud carry,
comfortable?"

I measured her with my eye before answering.

"About twenty," I replied.

"One on top o' t'other, like cattle!" he growled. "Why, mate, there
wouldn't be standin' room."

"Do you mean to put off from the ship in her?"

"In her and one of them others," he replied, meaning the quarter-boats.

"If you want my opinion, I should say that all hands ought to get into
the long-boat. She has heaps of beam, and will carry us all well.
Besides, she can sail. It will look better, too, to be found in her,
should we be picked up before landing; because you can make out that
both quarter-boats were carried away."

"We're all resolved," he answered doggedly. "We mean to put off in the
long-boat and one o' them quarter-boats. The quarter-boat can tow the
long-boat if it's calm. Why I ax'd you how many the long-boat 'ud carry
was because we don't want to overload the quarter-boat. We can use her
as a tender for stores and water, do you see, so that if we get to a
barren place we shan't starve."

"I understand."

"Them two boats 'll be enough, anyways."

"I should say so. They'd carry thirty persons between them," I answered.

To satisfy himself he went and took another look at the boats, and
afterwards called Johnson up to him.

They talked together for some time, occasionally glancing at me, and
Johnson then went away; but in a few minutes he returned with a mallet
and chisel. Both men now got into the port quarter-boat and proceeded,
to my rage and mortification, to rip a portion of the planking out
of her. In this way they knocked several planks away and threw them
overboard, and Johnson then got out of her and went to the other boat,
and fell to examining her closely to see that all was right; for they
evidently had made up their minds to use her, she being the larger of
the two.

The carpenter came and stood close to me, watching Johnson. I dare
say he expected I would ask him why he had injured the boat; but I
hardly dared trust myself to speak to him, so great was my passion and
abhorrence of the wretch whose motive in rendering this boat useless
was, of course, that we should not be able to save ourselves by her
when we found the ship sinking.

When Johnson had done, some men came aft, and they went to work to
provision the remaining quarter-boat, passing bags of bread, tins of
preserved meat, kegs of water, and stores of that description, from
hand to hand, until the boat held about a quarter as much again as she
was fit to carry.

In the mean time, others were busy in the long-boat, getting her fit
for sailing with a spare top-gallant stun'-sail boom and top-gallant
stun'-sail, looking to the oars and thole-pins and so forth.

The morning passed rapidly, the crew as busy as bees, smoking to a man,
and bandying coarse jokes with one another, and uttering loud laughs as
they worked.

The carpenter never once addressed me. He ran about the decks,
squirting tobacco-juice everywhere, superintending the work that
was going forward, and manifesting great excitement, with not a few
displays of bad temper.

A little before noon, when I made ready to take the sun's altitude, the
men at work about the long-boat suspended their occupation to watch
me, and Stevens drew aft, and came snuffling about my heels.

When I sang out eight bells, and went below to work out my
observations, he followed me into the cabin, and stood looking on. The
ignorance of his distrust was almost ludicrous; I believe he thought
I should work out a false reckoning if he were not by, but that his
watching would prevent me from making two and two five.

"Now, Mr. Royle," said he, seeing me put down my pencil; "where are we?"

I unrolled the chart upon the table, and drew a line down a rule from
the highly imaginary point to which I had brought the ship at noon on
the preceding day, to latitude 29°, longitude 74° 30'. "Here is our
position at the present moment," I said, pointing to the mark on the
chart.

"This here is Floridy, ain't it?" he demanded, outlining the coast
with his dirty thumb.

"That is Florida."

"Well, I calls it Floridy for short."

"Floridy then. I know what you mean."

"And you give us till the day arter tomorrow to do this bit o' distance
in?"

"It doesn't look much on the chart. There's not much room for miles to
show in on a square of paper like this."

"Well, we shall be all ready to lower away the boats when you give us
the word," said he.

"Perhaps you'll sit down for five minutes, Mr. Stevens, and inform me
exactly of your arrangements," I exclaimed; "for it is difficult for me
to do my share in this job unless I accurately know what yours is to
be."

He looked at me askant, his villainous eyes right in the corners of
their sockets; but sat down nevertheless, and tilted his cap over his
forehead in order to scratch the back of his head.

"I thought you knew what our plans was?" he remarked.

"Why, I've got a kind of general notion of them, but I should like to
understand them more clearly."

"Well, I thought they was clear--clear as mud in a wineglass.
Leastways, they're clear to all hands."

"For instance, why did you knock a hole in the quarter-boat this
morning?"

"I didn't think you'd want that explained," he answered promptly.

"But you see I do, Mr. Stevens."

"Well, we only want two boats, and it 'ud be a silly look-out to leave
the third one sound and tight to drift about with the _Grosvenor's_
name writ inside o' her."

"Why?"

"Because I says it would."

"How could she drift about if she were up at the davits?"

"How do I know?" he answered morosely. "I'm lookin' at things as may
happen. It ain't for me to explain of them."

"Very well," said I, master enough of the ruffian's meaning to require
no further information on this point.

"Anything more, Mr. Royle?"

"Yes. The next matter is this: you gave me to understand that we should
heave the ship to at night?"

"Sartinly. As soon as ever it comes on dusk, so as we shall have all
night before us to get well away."

"Do you mean to leave her with her canvas standing?"

"Just as she is when she's hove to."

"Some ship may sight her, and finding her abandoned, send a crew on
board to work her to the nearest port."

I thought this might tempt him to admit that she was to be scuttled,
which confession need not necessarily have involved the information
that I and the others were to be left on board.

But the fellow was too cunning to hint at such a thing.

"Let them as finds her keep her," he said, getting up. "That's their
consarn. Any more questions, Mr. Royle?"

"Are we to take our clothes with us?"

He grinned in the oddest manner.

"No. Them as has wallyables may shove 'em into their pockets; but no
kits 'll be allowed in the boats. We're a poor lot o' shipwrecked
sailors--marineers as the newspapers calls us--come away from a ship
that was settlin' under our legs afore we had the arts to leave her. We
jest had time to wittol the boats and stand for the shore. We depend
upon Christian kindness for 'elp; and if we falls foul o' a missionary,
leave me alone to make him vurship our piety. The skipper he fell mad
and jumped overboard. The chief mate he lost his life by springin' into
vun o' the boats and missin' of it; and the second mate he manfully
stuck to the ship for the love he bore her owners, and we pree-sume,
went down with her."

"Oh!" I exclaimed, forcing a laugh; "then I am not to admit that I am
the second mate, when questioned?"

He stared at me as if he were drunk, and cried, "_You!_" then burst
into a laugh, and hit me a slap on the back.

"Ah!" he exclaimed. "I forgot. Of course you'll not be second mate when
you get ashore."

"What then?"

"Why, a passenger--a parson--the ship's doctor. We'll tell you wot to
say as we go along. Come, get us off this bloomin' coast, will you, as
soon as you can," pointing to the chart. "All hands is growin' delikit
with care and consarn: as Joe Sampson used to sing--

    'Vith care an' consarn
    Ve're a vastin' avay.'

And our nerviss systems is that wrought up with fear of our necks, that
blowed if we shan't want two months o' strong physicking and prime
livin' at the werry least, to make men of us agin arter we're landed."

And with a leering grin and an ugly nod he quitted the cabin.




CHAPTER VIII.


I made up my mind as Stevens left me to bring this terrible time to an
end on Friday afternoon, come what might. Let it fall a calm, let it
blow a gale, on Friday afternoon I would tell the carpenter that the
ship was off the coast of Florida, forty or fifty miles distant.

If, by the boatswain's ruse, I could keep the ship afloat and carry her
to Bermuda, it would matter little whether we hove her to one hundred
or even two hundred miles distant from the island. The suspense I
endured, the horror of our situation, was more than I could bear. I
believed that my health and strength would give way if I protracted
the ship's journey to the spot where the men would leave her, even for
twenty-four hours longer than Friday.

The task before me then was to prepare for the final struggle, to
thoroughly mature my plans, to utilize the control I still had over
the ship to the utmost advantage, and to put into shape all plausible
objections and hints I could think upon, which would be helpful to me
if adopted by the crew.

What I most felt was the want of firearms. The revolver I carried was
indeed five-chambered, and there was much good fortune in my having
been the first to get hold of it. But could I have armed the boatswain
or even the steward with another pistol, I should have been much easier
in my mind when I contemplated the chances of a struggle between us and
the crew.

However, there is no evil that is not attended by some kind of
compensation, and I found this out; for taking it into my head that
there might be a pistol among Duckling's effects, though I was pretty
sure that the weapon he had threatened me with was the one in my
possession, I entered his cabin with the intention to begin a search,
but had no sooner opened the lid of his chest than I perceived that I
had been forestalled, for the clothes were tossed anyway, the pockets
turned inside out, and articles taken out of wrappers, as I should
judge from the paper coverings that lay among the clothes.

So now I could only hope that Duckling had _not_ had a pistol, since
whoever had rifled his box must have met with it. And that Stevens was
the thief in this as in the case of the silver I had no doubt at all.

There being now only two of us to keep watch, Stevens and I did not
meet at dinner. I took his place whilst he dined, and he then relieved
me.

The steward told me they were having a fine feast in the forecastle;
that upwards of ten of the fowls which had been strangled in the
morning had been put to bake for the men's dinner; that in addition to
this they had cooked three legs of pork, and were drinking freely from
a jar of rum which the carpenter had ordered him to take forward.

I could pretty well judge that they were enjoying themselves, by the
loud choruses they were singing.

Believing they would end in becoming drunk, I knocked on Miss
Robertson's door, to tell her on no account to show herself on deck.
She gave me her hand the moment she saw me, and gently brought me into
the cabin and made me sit down, though I had not meant to stay.

The old gentleman stood with his back to the door, looking through the
port-hole. Though he heard my voice, he did not turn, and only looked
round when his daughter pulled him by the arm.

"How do you do, sir?" he exclaimed, making me a most courtly bow. "I
hope you are well? You find us, sir," with a stately wave of the hand,
"in wretched accommodation; but all this will be mended presently. The
great lesson of life is patience."

And he made me another bow, meanwhile looking hard at me and
contracting his brows.

I was more affected by this painful change--this visible and rapid
decay, not of his memory only, but of his mind--than I know how to
describe. The mournful, helpless look his daughter gave him, the
tearless melancholy in her eyes, as she bent them on me, hit me hard.

I did not know how to answer him, and could only fix my eyes on the
deck.

"This prospect," he continued, pointing to the port-hole, "is
exceedingly monotonous. I have been watching it I should say a full
half-hour--about that time, my dear, should you not think?--and find
no change in it whatever. I witness always the same unbroken line of
water, slightly darker, I observe, than the sky which bends to meet
it. That unbroken line has a curious effect upon me. It seems to press
like a substantial ligature or binding upon my forehead; positively,"
he exclaimed, with a smile almost as sweet as his child's, "as though I
had a cord tied round my head."

He swept his hand over his forehead, as though he could remove the
sensation of tightness by the gesture. It was pitiful to witness such a
venerable and dignified old gentleman stricken thus in his mind by the
sufferings and miserable horrors of shipwreck.

"I think, sir," I said, addressing him with all the respectfulness I
could infuse into my voice, "that the uneasiness of which you complain
would leave you if you would lie down. The eye gets strained by staring
through a port-hole, and that eternal horizon yonder really grows a
kind of craze in one's head, if watched too long."

"You are quite right, sir," he replied, making me another bow; and,
addressing his daughter, "This gentleman sympathizes with the peculiar
inspirations of what I may call monotonous nature."

He looked at her with extraordinary and painful earnestness. Evidently,
some recollection had leaped into his mind and quitted him immediately,
leaving him bewildered by it.

He then said, in a most plaintive voice--

"I will lie down. Your shoulder, my love."

He stretched out his old trembling hand. I got up to help him, but he
withdrew from me with an air of offended pride, and reared his figure
to its full height.

"This is my daughter, sir," he exclaimed, with cold emphasis; and
though I knew he was not accountable for his behaviour, I shrunk back,
feeling more completely snubbed than ever I remember being in my life.

With her assistance he got into the bunk, and lay there quite still.

She drew close to me, and obliged me to share the seat she made of the
box which had contained the steward's linen.

"You are not angry with him?" she whispered.

"Indeed not."

"I shall lose him soon. He will not live long," she said, and tears
came into her eyes.

"God will spare him to you, Miss Robertson. Have courage. Our trials
are nearly ended. Once ashore he will recover his health--it is this
miserable confinement, this gloomy cabin, this absence of the comforts
he has been used to, that are telling upon his mind. He will live to
recall all this in his English home. The worst has never come until it
is passed--that is my creed; because the worst may be transformed into
good even when it is on us."

"_You_ have the courage," she answered, "not I. But you give me
courage. God knows what I should have done but for you."

I looked into her brave soft eyes, swimming in tears, and could have
spoken some deep thoughts to her then, awakened by her words.

I was silent a moment, and then said--

"You must not go on deck to-day. Indeed, I think you had better remain
below until I ask you to join me."

"Why? Is there any new danger?"

"Nothing you need fear. The men who fancy themselves very nearly at
their journey's end, threaten to grow boisterous. But my importance to
them is too great to allow them to offend me _yet_. Still, it will be
best for you to keep out of sight."

"I will do whatever you wish."

"I am sure you will. My wish is to save you--not my wish only--it is my
resolution. Trust in me wholly, Miss Robertson. Keep up your courage,
for I may want you to help me at the last."

"You must trust in me, too, as my whole trust is in you," she answered,
smiling.

I smiled back at her, and said--

"Now, let me tell you what may happen--what all my energies are and
have been engaged to bring about. On Friday afternoon I shall tell
the carpenter that the ship is fifty or sixty miles off the coast
of Florida. If the night is calm--and I pray that it may be--the
ship will be hove to, that is, rendered stationary on the water; the
long-boat will be slung over the side, and the quarter-boat lowered.
All _this_ is certain to happen. But now come my doubts. Will the crew
remain on board until the man they send into the hold to scuttle the
vessel rejoins them? or will they get into the boats and wait for him
alongside? If they take to the boats and wait for the man, the ship is
ours. If they remain on board, then our preservation will depend upon
the bo'sun."

"How?"

"He will either kill the man who gets into the hold, or knock him
insensible. He will then have to act as though _he_ were the man he has
knocked on the head."

"I see."

"If they call to him, he will have to answer them without showing
himself. Perhaps he will call to them. They will answer him. They will
necessarily muffle their voices that we who are aft may not suspect
what they are about. In that case the bo'sun may counterfeit the voice
of the man he has knocked on the head successfully."

"But what will he tell them?"

"Why, that his job is nearly finished, and that they had best take to
the boats and hold off for him, as he is scuttling her in half a dozen
places, and the people aft will find her sinking and make a rush to the
boats if they are not kept away. He will tell them that when he has
done scuttling her, he will run up and jump overboard and swim to them.
This, if done cleverly, may decide the men to shove off. We shall see."

"It is a clever scheme," she answered, musingly. "The boatswain's life
depends upon his success, and I believe he will succeed in duping them."

"What can be done he will do, I am sure," I said, not choosing to
admit that I had not her confidence in the stratagem, because I feared
that the more the boatswain should endeavour to disguise his voice the
greater would be the risk of its being recognised. "But let me tell you
that this is the worst view of the case. It is quite probable that the
men will take to the boats and wait for their mate to finish in the
hold, not only because it will save time, but because they will imagine
it an effectual way of compelling us to remain on the vessel.

"What villains! and if they take to the boats?"

"Then I shall want you."

"What can I do?"

"We shall see. There still remains a third chance. The carpenter is,
or I have read his character upside down, a born murderer. It is
possible that this villain may design to leave the man whom he sends
into the hold to sink with the ship. He has not above half a dozen
chums, confidential friends, among the crew; and it will be his and
their policy to rid themselves of the others as best they can, so
as to diminish the number of witnesses against them. If, therefore,
they contemplate this, they will leave the ship while they suppose
the act of scuttling to be actually proceeding. Now, amongst the many
schemes which have entered my mind, there was one I should have put
into practice had I not feared to commit any action which might in the
smallest degree imperil your safety. This scheme was to cautiously
sound the minds of the men who were not in the carpenter's intimate
confidence; ascertain how far they relished the notion of quitting
the ship for a shore that might prove inhospitable, or on which their
boats might be wrecked and themselves drowned, and discover by what
shrewdness I am master of, how many I might get to come over to my side
if the boatswain and myself turned upon Stevens and killed him, shot
down Johnson, and fell, armed with my revolver and a couple of belaying
pins, upon Cornish and Fish--these three men composing Stevens'
cabinet. I say that this was quite practicable, and no very great
courage required to execute it, as we should have killed or stunned
these men before they would be able to resist us."

"There would be nine left."

"Yes; but I should have reckoned upon some of them helping me."

"You could not have depended upon them."

"Well, we have another plan, and I refer to this only to show you a
specimen of some of the schemes which have come into my head."

"Mr. Royle, if you had a pistol to give me, I would help you to shoot
them! Show me how I can aid you in saving our lives, and I will do your
bidding!" she exclaimed, with her eyes on fire.

I put my finger on my lip and smiled.

She blushed scarlet and said, "You do not think me womanly to talk so!"

"You would not hate me were you to know my thoughts," I answered,
rising.

"Are you going, Mr. Royle?"

"Yes. Stevens, for all I know, may have seen me come in here. I would
rather he should find me in my own cabin."

"We see very little of you, considering that we are all three in one
small ship," she said, hanging her head.

"I never leave you willingly, and would be with you all day if I might.
But a rough sailor like me is poor company."

"Sailors are the best company in the world, Mr. Royle."

"Only one woman in every hundred thinks so--perhaps one in every
thousand. Well, you would see less of me than you do if I was not
prepared to lay down my life for you. No! I don't say that boastfully.
I have sworn in my heart to save you, and it shall cost me my life if I
fail. That is what I should have said."

She turned her back suddenly, and I hardly knew whether I had not said
too much. I stood watching her for a few moments, with my fingers on
the handle of the door. Finding she did not move, I went quietly out,
but as I closed the door I heard her sob. Now, what had I said to make
her cry? I did not like to go in again, and so I repaired to my cabin,
wishing, instead of allowing my conversation to drift into a personal
current, I had confined it to my plans, which I had not half unfolded
to her, but from which I had been as easily diverted as if they were a
bit of fiction instead of a living plot that our lives depended on.

During my watch from four to six, Stevens joined me, and asked how
"Floridy" would bear from the ship when she was hove to?

I told him that Florida was not an island, but part of the main coast
of North America, and that he might head the boats any point from
N.N.W. to S.S.W. and still, from a distance of fifty or sixty miles,
fetch some part of the Florida coast, which I dared say, showed a
seaboard ranging four hundred miles long.

This seemed new to him, which more than ever convinced me of his
ignorance, for though I had repeatedly pointed out Florida to him, yet
he did not know but that it was an island, which might easily be missed
by steering the boats a point out of the course given.

He then asked me what compasses we had that we might take with us.

"We shall only want one in the long-boat," I replied; "and there is one
on the table in the captain's cabin which will do. Have you got the
long-boat all ready?"

"Ay, clean as a new brass farden, and provisioned for a month."

"Now let me understand; when the ship is hove to you will sling the
long-boat over?"

"I explained all that before," he answered gruffly.

"Not that."

"You're hangin' on a tidy bit about them there boats. What do you
think?"

"I suppose my life is as good as yours, and that I have a right to find
out how we are to abandon this ship and make the shore," I answered,
with some show of warmth, my object being to get all the information
from him that was possible to be drawn. "You'll get the long-boat
alongside, and all hands will jump into her? Is that it?"

"Why, wot do you think we'd get the boat alongside for if we didn't get
into her?" he replied, with a kind of growling laugh.

"Will anybody be left on the ship?"

"Anybody left on the ship?" he exclaimed, fetching a sudden breath:
"Wot's put that in yer head?"

"I was afraid that that yellow devil, the cook, might induce you to
leave the steward behind to take his chance to sink or swim in her,
just out of revenge for calling bad pork good," said I, fixing my eyes
upon him.

"No, no, nothen of the sort," he replied quickly, and with evident
alarm. "Curse the cook! d'ye think I's skipper to give them kind o'
orders?"

"Now you see what I am driving at," I said, laying my hand on his arm,
and addressing him with a smile. "I really did think you meant to leave
the poor devil of a steward behind. And what I wanted to understand
was how you proposed to manage with the boats to prevent him boarding
you--that is why I was curious."

The suspicious ruffian took the bait as I meant he should; and putting
on an unconcerned manner, which fitted him as ill as the pilot jacket
which he had stolen from the captain he had murdered, and which he
was now wearing, inquired, "What I meant by that? If they left the
steward behind--not that they was goin' to, but to say it, for the sake
o' argyment--what would the management of the boats have to do with
preventin' him boardin' of them? He didn't understand."

"Oh, nothing," I replied with a shrug. "Since we are to take the
steward with us, there's an end of the matter."

"Can't you explain, sir?" he cried, striving to suppress his temper.

"It is not worth the trouble," said I; "because, don't you see, if even
you had made up your mind to leave the steward on the ship, you'd only
have one man to deal with. What put this matter into my head was a
yarn I read some time ago about a ship's company wishing to leave their
vessel. There were only two boats which were serviceable, and these
wouldn't hold above two-thirds of the crew. So the men conspired among
themselves--do you understand me?"

"Yes, yes, I'm a-followin' of you."

"That is, twelve men out of a crew composed of eighteen hands resolved
to lower the boats and get away, and leave the others to shift for
themselves. But they had to act cautiously, because, don't you see,
the fellows who were to be left behind would become desperate with the
fear of death, and if any of them contrived to get into the boats,
they might begin a fight, which, if it didn't capsize the boats, was
pretty sure to end in a drowning match. Of course, in our case, as I
have said, even supposing you _had_ made up your mind to leave the
steward behind, we should have nothing to fear, because he would be
only one man. But when you come to two or three, or four men driven mad
by terror, then look out if they get among you in a boat; for fear will
make two as strong as six, and I shouldn't like to be in the boat where
such a fight was taking place."

"Well, but how did them other chaps manage as you're tellin' about?"

"Why, they all got into the boats in a lump, and shoved off well clear
of the ship. The others jumped into the water after them, but never
reached the boats. But all this doesn't hit _our_ case. You wished me
to explain, and now you know my reasons for asking you how you meant
to manage with the boats. Do not forget that there is a woman among
us, and a fight at the last moment, when our lives may depend upon
orderliness and coolness, may drown us all."

And so saying I left him, under pretence of looking at the compass.




CHAPTER IX.


I had no reason to suppose that the hints I took care to wrap up in my
conversation with Stevens would shape his actions to the form I wished
them to take; but though they did no good, they would certainly do me
no harm, and it was at least certain that my opinion was respected, so
that I might hope that some weight would attach to whatever suggestions
I offered.

Nothing now remained to be done but to wait the result of events; but
no language can express an idea of my anxiety as the hours passed,
bringing us momentarily closer to the dreaded and yet wished-for issue.

Some of the men got intoxicated that afternoon, and I believe two of
them had a desperate set to; they sang until they were tired, and for
tea had more hot roast pork and fowls.

But the majority had their senses, and kept those who were drunk under;
so that the riot was all forward.

I wondered what the boatswain would think of the shindy over his head,
and whether he had a watch to tell the time by. His abode was surely a
very dismal one, among the coals in the forepeak, and dark as night,
with plenty of rats to squeak about his ears, and the endless creaking
and complaining of the timbers under water.

A terrible idea possessed me once. It was that he might be asleep when
the man went down to scuttle the ship, who, of course, would take a
candle with him, and find him lying there.

But there was no use in _imagining_ evil. I could only do what was
possible. If we were doomed to die, why, we must meet our fate
heroically. What more?

It blew freshly at eleven o'clock, and held all night. I kept all
the sail on the ship that she would bear, and up to noon next day we
spanked along at a great pace.

Then the wind fell light and veered round to the north; but this did
not matter to me, for I showed the carpenter a run on the chart which
convincingly proved to him that, even if we did no more than four
knots an hour until next day, we should be near enough to the coast of
Florida to heave to.

This afternoon the men made preparations to swing the long-boat over
the side, clapping on strops to the collar of the mainstay, and forward
round the tressel-tree, ready to hook on the tackles to lift the boat
out of her chocks. Their eagerness to get away from the ship was well
illustrated by these early preparations.

All that day they fared sumptuously on roast pork, and whatever took
their fancy among the cuddy stores, but drank little, or at all events
not enough to affect them, though there was sufficient rum in the hold
to kill them all off in a day, had they had a mind to broach the casks.

Towards evening we sighted no less than five ships, two standing to the
south and the others steering north. The spectacle of these vessels
fully persuaded Stevens that we were nearing the coast, he telling me
he had no doubt they were from the West Indies, which he supposed were
not more than four hundred miles distant.

I did not undeceive him.

I saw Miss Robertson for a few minutes that evening to repeat my
caution to her not to show herself on deck.

The men were again at their pranks in the forecastle, sky-larking
as they call it at sea, and, though not drunk, they were making a
tremendous noise. One of them had got a concertina, and sat playing
it, tailor-fashion, on top of the capstan, and some were dancing, two
having dressed themselves up as women in canvas bonnets, and blankets
round them to resemble skirts.

Fun of this sort would have been innocent enough had there been
any recognized discipline to overlook it; but from decent mirth to
boisterous, coarse disorder, is an easy step to sailors, and in the
present temper of the crew the least provocation might convert the ship
into a theatre for exhibitions of horse-play which, begun in vanity,
might end in criminal excesses.

During my brief conversation with Miss Robertson, I asked her an odd
question--Could she steer a ship?

She answered, "Yes."

"You say 'yes' because you will try if you are wanted to do so," I said.

"I say 'yes' because I really understand how to use the wheel," she
replied, seriously.

"Where did you learn?"

"During our voyage to the Cape of Good Hope. I used to watch the man
steering, and observe him move the wheel so as to keep the compass card
steady. I told Captain Jenkinson I should like to learn to steer, and
he would often let me hold the wheel, and for fun give me orders."

"Which way would you pull the spokes if I told you to put the helm to
starboard?"

"To the left," she answered, promptly.

"And if I said 'hard over?'"

"If the wind was blowing on the left hand side I would push the wheel
to the right until I could push it no further. You can't puzzle me,
indeed. I know all the steering terms. _Really_, I can steer."

I quite believed her, though I should never have dreamt of her
proficiency in this matter, and told her that if we succeeded in
getting away from the boats, she would be of the utmost importance to
us, because then there would be three men to work the ship, whereas two
only would be at liberty if one had to take the wheel.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now I come to Friday.

We were keeping no regular watches. Stevens, ever distrustful of
me, was markedly so now that our voyage was nearly ended. He was
incessantly up and down, looking at the compass, computing the ship's
speed by staring at the passing water, and often engaged, sometimes
on the poop, sometimes on the forecastle, in conversation with Fish,
Cornish, Johnson, and others.

He made no inquiries after Mr. or Miss Robertson; he appeared to have
forgotten their existence. I also noticed that he shirked me as often
as he could, leaving the deck when I appeared, and mounting the ladder
the furthest from where I stood when he came aft from the main-deck.

The dawn had broken with a promise of a beautiful day; though the
glass, which had been dropping very slowly all through the night,
stood low at eight o'clock that morning. The sun, even at that early
hour, was intensely hot, and here and there the pitch in the seams of
the deck adhered to the soles of one's boots, while the smell of the
paint-work rose hot in the nostrils.

There was a long swell, the undulations moderate though wide apart,
coming from the westward; the clouds were very high, and the sky a
dazzling blue, and the wind about north, very soft and refreshing.

The men were quiet, and continued so throughout the day. Many of
them, as well as the carpenter, incessantly gazed around the horizon,
evidently fearing the approach of a vessel; and some would steal aft
and look at the compass, and then go away again.

We were under all plain sail, and the ship, as near as I could tell,
was making about five knots an hour, though the log gave us seven, and
I logged it seven on the slate in case of any arguments arising.

When I came on deck with my sextant in hand to take sights, I was
struck by the intent expressions on the faces of the crew, the whole of
whom, even including the cook, had collected on the poop, or stood upon
the ladders waiting for me.

When I saw them thus congregated, my heart for a moment failed me.

The tremendous doubt crossed my mind--were they acquainted with the
ship's whereabouts? Did they know, had they known all through, that I
was deceiving them?

No!

As I looked at them I became reassured. Theirs was an anxiety I should
have been blind to misconstrue. The true expression on their faces
represented nothing but eager curiosity to know whether our journey
were really ended, or whether more time must elapse before they could
quit the ship which they had rendered accursed with the crime of
murder, and which as I well knew, from what Stevens had over and over
again let fall, they abhorred with all the terrors of vulgar conscience.

Having made my observations, I was about to quit the poop, when one of
the men called out--

"Tell us what you make it."

"I will when I have worked it out," I replied.

"Work it out here, whilst we looks on."

"Do any of you understand navigation?"

There was no reply.

"Unless you can count," said I, "you'll not be able to follow me."

"Two and two and one makes nine," said a voice.

"What do ye mean by jokin'? You ought to be ashamed o' yourself,"
exclaimed one of the men. And then there was a blow, and immediately
after an oath.

"If you want me to work out these sights in your presence, I'll do so,"
said I.

And I went below to get the things I required, leaving my sextant on
deck to show them that I meant to be honest.

When I returned, they were all around the skylight, gazing at the
sextant as though it were an animal; no man taking the liberty to touch
it, however.

They came, hustling each other about me as I sat on the skylight
working out my figures, and I promise you their proximity, coupled with
my notion that they _might_ suspect I had been deceiving them, did not
sharpen my wits so as to expedite my calculations.

I carried two reckonings in my head--false, and the true; and finding
our actual whereabouts to be ninety-eight miles from Bermuda, the
islands bearing W.S.W. as straight as a line, I unfolded the chart, and
giving them the imaginary longitude and latitude, put my finger upon
the spot we were supposed to have reached, exclaiming,

"Now you can see where we are!"

"Just make a small mark there with your pencil, will you?" said
Johnson; "then all hands can have a look."

I did so, and quitted the skylight, surrendering the chart to the men,
who made a strange picture as they stood poring over it, pointing with
their brown forefingers and arguing.

"There's no question I can answer, is there?" said I to the carpenter.

"Mates, is there anything you want to say to Mr. Royle?" he exclaimed.

"When are we going to heave the ship to?" asked Fish.

"That's for you to answer," I rejoined.

"Well, I'm not for standin' too close in shore," said Fish.

"How fur off do you say is this here Florida coast?" asked Johnson.

"About sixty miles. Look at the chart."

"And every minute brings us nearer," said a man.

"That's true," I replied. "But you don't want to leave the ship before
dusk, do you?"

The men looked at each other as though they were not sure that they
ought to confide so much to me as an answer to my question would
involve. I particularly took notice of this, and felt how thoroughly I
was put aside by them in their intentions.

The carpenter said, "You'll understand our arrangements by-and-by, Mr.
Royle. How's the wind?"

"About north," said I.

"Mates, shall we bring the yards to the masts and keep the leeches
liftin' till we're ready to stop her?"

"The best thing as can happen," said Johnson.

"She'll lie to the west'ards at that, and 'll look to be sailin'
properly if a wessel sights her; and she'll make no way neither," said
Stevens.

"You can't do better," I exclaimed.

So the helm was put down, and as the men went to work I descended to my
cabin.

The steward's head was at the pantry door, and I called to him, "Bring
me a biscuit and the sherry."

I wanted neither, but I had something to say to him; and if Stevens
saw him come to my cabin with a tray in his hand he was not likely to
follow and listen at the door.

The steward put the tray down and was going away, when I took him by
the arm and led him to the extremity of the cabin.

"Do you value your life?" I said to him in a whisper.

He stared at me and turned pale.

"Just listen," I continued. "At dusk this evening the men are going to
leave the ship in the boats. They are going to scuttle the ship first
that she may fill with water and sink. It is not their intention to
take us with them."

"My God!" he muttered, trembling like a freezing man: "are we to be
left on board to sink?"

"That is what they mean. But the bo'sun, whom they believe to be
drowned, is in the hold ready to kill the man who goes down to scuttle
the ship. If we act promptly we may save our lives and get away from
the ruffians. There are only three of us, but we must fight as though
we were twelve men if it should come to our having to fight. Understand
that. When once the men are in the boats no creature among them must
ever get on board again alive. Hit hard--spare nothing! If we are
beaten, we are dead men; if we conquer, our lives are our own."

"I'll do my best," answered the steward, the expression on whose face,
however, was anything but heroical. "But you must tell me what to do,
sir. I shan't know, sir. I never was in a fight, and the sight of blood
is terrifying to me, sir."

"You'll have to bottle up your fears. Don't misunderstand me, steward.
Every man left on board this ship to drown will look to his companions
to help him to save his life. And by all that's holy, if you show any
cowardice, if you skulk, if you do not fight like forty men, if you do
not stick by my side and obey my words like a flash of lightning, as
sure as you breathe I'll put a bullet through your head. I'll kill you
for not helping me."

And I pulled out the pistol from my pocket and flourished it under his
nose.

He recoiled from the weapon with his eyes half out of his head, and
gasped--

"What am I to use, sir?"

"The first iron belaying-pin you can snatch up," I answered. "There
are plenty to be found. And now be off. Not a look, not a word! Go to
your work as usual. If you open your mouth you are a dead man."

He went away as pale as a ghost. However, cur as he was, I did not
despair of his turning to at the last moment. Cowards will sometimes
make terrible antagonists. The madness of fear renders them desperate,
and in their frenzy they will do more execution than the brave
deliberate man.

I did not remain long off the poop, being too anxious to observe the
movements of the crew.

I found the breeze slackening fast, with every appearance of a calm
in the hot, misty blue sky, and the glassy aspect of the horizon. The
lower sails flapped to every motion of the ship, and lying close to
what little wind there was, we made no progress at all.

The promise of a calm, though favourable to the intentions of the men,
in so far as it would keep the horizon clear of sailing ships, and so
limit the probability of their operations being witnessed to the chance
of a steamer passing, was a blow to me; as one essential part of my
scheme, that of swinging the mainyards round, and getting way on the
ship, when the men had left her, would be impracticable.

The glass, indeed, stood low, but then this might betoken the coming
of more wind than I should want, a gale that would detain the men on
the ship, and force them to defer the scheme of abandoning her for an
indefinite period.

They had gone to dinner, but were so quiet that the vessel seemed
deserted, and nothing was audible but the clank of the tiller-chains
and the rattling of the sails against the masts.

Stevens was forward, apparently having his dinner with the men. In
glancing through the skylight, I saw Mary Robertson looking up at me.
I leaned forward, so that my face was concealed from the man at the
wheel--the only person on deck besides myself--and whispered--

"Keep up your courage, and be ready to act as I may direct."

"I am quite ready," she answered.

"Remain in your cabin," I said, "and don't let the men see you;" for it
had flashed upon me that if the crew saw her they might force her to go
along with them in the boats.

"I wanted a little brandy for papa," she answered. "He is very poorly
and weak, and rambles terribly in his talk."

She turned to hide her tears from me, and prevent me witnessing her
struggles to restrain them. She would feel their impotence, the mockery
of them at such a time; besides, dear heart, she would think I should
distrust her courage if she let me see her weep.

The steward came forward under the skylight as she entered her cabin,
and said--

"I will fight for my life, sir."

"That is my advice to you."

"I will do my best. I have been thinking of my wife and child, sir."

"Hush!" I cried. "Not so loud. If your courage fails you, there is a
girl in that cabin there, who will show you how to be brave. Remember
two things--act quickly and strike hard; and for God's sake don't fall
to drinking to pull up your nerves. If I find you drunk I will call
upon the men to drown you."

And with this injunction I left the skylight.

The men remained a great while in the forecastle, all so quiet that
I wondered whether some among them were even now below scuttling the
ship. But they would hardly act so prematurely. To be sure, it would
take a long time for the ship to fill, bored even in half a dozen
places by an auger; but until the evening fell, and they were actually
in the boats, they could not be sure that a wind would not spring up to
oblige them to keep to the ship.

I remained on deck, never thinking of dinner, watching the weather
anxiously.

An ordinary seaman came aft to relieve the wheel; but finding that the
ship had no steerage way on her, he squatted himself on the taffrail,
pulled out a pipe and began to smoke. I took no notice of him.

Shortly afterwards Stevens came along the main-deck and mounted the
poop.

"A dead calm," said he, after sweeping the horizon with his hand over
his eyes, "and blessedly hot."

"Is the ship to be left all standing?" I inquired.

"What do you think?" he replied, with an air of indifference, casting
his eyes aloft.

"I should snug her, certainly."

"Why?" he demanded, folding his arms, and staring at me as he leaned
against the poop-rail.

"Because, should she drift, and be overhauled by another ship, it will
look more ship-shape if she is found snug, as though she had been
abandoned in a storm."

"There's something in that," he answered, without shifting his position.

"Shall I tell the men to shorten sail?"

"If you like," he replied, grinning in my face.

I pretended not to observe his odd manner, being very anxious to get in
all the sail that I could whilst there were men to do it. So I sang
out, "All hands shorten sail!"

The men on the forecastle stared, and burst into a laugh; and one of
a group on the main-deck, who were inspecting the provisions for the
long-boat, which lay under a tarpaulin, exclaimed--

"Wot's goin' to happen?"

I glanced at the carpenter, who still surveyed me with a broad grin,
and walked aft. I was a fool not to have anticipated this. What was it
to the crew whether the ship sank with all sails standing or with all
sails furled?

I was too restless to go below; but to dissemble my terrible anxiety
as well as I could, I lighted a pipe and crouched in the shadow of the
mizzen-mast out of the way of the broiling sun.

The breeze had utterly gone. The sea was glassy, and white and long
wreaths of mist stood, down in the south, upon the horizon. As I looked
at the ship, at her graceful spaces of canvas lowering upon the fine
and delicate masts, her white decks, her gleaming brass-work, the
significance of the crime meditated by the crew was shocking to me.
The awful cold-bloodedness with which they meant to sink the beautiful
vessel, with the few poor lives who were to be left defenceless on
board, overwhelmed me with horror and detestation. So atrocious an act
I thought the Almighty would not surely permit. Could not I count upon
His mercy and protection? Remembering that I had not sought Him yet,
I pulled off my cap, and without kneeling--for I durst not kneel with
the eyes of the men upon me--I mutely invoked His heavenly protection.
I pleaded with all the strength of my heart for the sweet and helpless
girl whom, under His divine providence, I had already rescued from one
dreadful fate, and whom, under His sure guidance, I might yet preserve
from the slow and bitter death which the crew had planned that we
should suffer.

It was not until six o'clock that the carpenter ordered the men to get
the long-boat over. But just before he called out I had noticed, with
a leap of joy in me, that the water out in the north-west was dark as
with the shadow of a cloud upon it.

Though this was no more than a cat's paw, and travelled very slowly, I
was certain, not only from the indications of the barometer, but from
the complexion of the sky, that wind was behind.

The men did not appear to notice it, and when the carpenter sang out
the order all hands went to work briskly.

Some ran aloft with tackles, which they made fast to the starboard
fore and main yard-arms; others hooked on tackles to the straps which
were already round the tressel-tree and collar of the mainstay. But
willingly as they worked, even these preliminary measures ran into a
great deal of time, and before they had done, a light breeze had come
down on the ship and taken her aback.

The carpenter, seeing this, clapped some hands on to the fore and
mizzen braces, and filled the fore and after sails. The ship was
therefore hove to with her head at west.

This done, he went to the wheel, put the helm amidship and made it
fast; and then went forward again to superintend the work.

I took up my position on the starboard side of the poop, close against
the ladder, and there I remained. I scanned the faces of the men
carefully, and found all hands present, including the cook. I thus
knew that no man was below in the hold, and it was now my business to
watch closely that I might miss the man who should have the job to
scuttle the ship.

The breeze died away, but in the same direction whence it had come was
another shadow, more defined and extending far to the north.

The men had begun their work late, and as they knew that they had
little or no twilight to count upon, laboured hard at the difficult
task of raising the long-boat out of her chucks and swinging her clear
of the bulwarks.

It was close upon seven o'clock before they were ready to hoist. They
took the end of one fall to the capstan on the main-deck, the other
they led forward through a block, and presently up rose the boat until
it was on a level with the bulwarks. Then the yard-arm tackles were
manned, the midship falls slacked off, and the big boat sank gently
down into the water.

She was brought alongside at once, and three men jumped into her. Then
began the process of storing the provisions. This was carried on by
five men, while the remaining three came aft, and whilst one got into
the quarter-boat, the other two lowered her.

_At this moment I missed the carpenter._

I held my breath, looking into the boats and all round.

He was not to be seen.

I strained my ear at the foremost skylight, conceiving that he might
have entered the cuddy.

All was silent there.

Beyond the shadow of a doubt, he it was who had planned the scuttling
of the ship, and he it was who had left the deck to do it.

It was a supreme moment. I had not contemplated that _he_ would be the
man who should bore the hole. If the boatswain killed him----!

Great God! the hands were on deck--all about us! If he did not return,
they would seek him. He was their leader, and they were not likely to
quit the ship without him.

The hair stirred on my head; the sweat stood in beads on my face. I bit
my lip half through to control my features, and stood waiting for--I
knew not what!




CHAPTER X.


The men went on busily provisioning the long-boat, some whistling gay
tunes, others laughing and passing jokes, all in good spirits, as
though they were going on a holiday expedition.

The shadow on the horizon was broadening fast, and the sun was sinking
quickly, making the ocean blood-red with its burning effulgence, and
veining the well-greased masts with lines of fire.

What had happened?

Even now, as I thought, was the villain lying dead, with the auger in
his hand?

The minutes rolling past seemed eternal. Five, ten, twenty minutes
came and went. The sun's lower limb was close against the water-line,
sipping the ruby splendour it had kindled. The breeze was now close
at hand, but we still lay in a breathless calm, and the sails flapped
softly to the tuneful motion of the deep.

Then some of the men who remained on deck went over the ship's side,
leaving four of the crew on the main-deck close against the gangway.
These men sometimes looked at me, sometimes into the cuddy, sometimes
forward, but none of them spoke.

Now the sun was half hidden, and the soft breeze blowing upon the
sails, outlined the masts against those which were backed.

Suddenly--and I started as though I had beheld a ghost--the carpenter
came round from before the galley, and walked quickly to the gangway.

"Over with you, lads!" he cried.

Like rats leaping from a sinking hull they dropped, one after the
other, into the long-boat, the carpenter going last. Their painter was
fast to a chain-plate, and they cast it adrift. The quarter-boat was in
tow, and in a few minutes both boats stood at some two or three cables'
lengths from the ship, the men watching her.

The last glorious fragment of the sinking sun fled, and darkness came
creeping swiftly over the sea.

I had stood like one in whom life had suddenly been extinguished--too
much amazed to act. Seeing the carpenter return, I had made sure that
he had killed the boatswain; but his behaviour contradicted this
supposition. Had he been attacked by the boatswain and killed him,
would he have quitted the ship without revenging himself upon me, whom
he would know to be at the bottom of this conspiracy against his life?

What, then, was the meaning of his return, his collected manner, his
silent exit from the ship? Had the boatswain, lying hidden, _died_?
The thought fired my blood. Yes, I believed that he had died--that the
carpenter had performed his task unmolested without perceiving the
corpse--and that, whilst I stood there, the water was rushing into the
ship's hold!

I flung myself off the poop, and bounded forward. In the briefest
possible time I was peering down the forescuttle.

"Below there!" I called.

There was no answer.

"Below there, I say, boatswain!"

My cry was succeeded by a hollow, thumping sound.

"Below there!" I shouted, for the third time.

I heard the sounds of a foot treading on something that crunched under
the tread.

"I am Mr. Royle. Bo'sun, are you below? For God Almighty's sake answer
and let me know that you are living."

"Have the skunks cleared out?" responded a voice, and, stumbling as he
moved, the boatswain came under the forescuttle and turned up his face.

"What have you done?" I cried, almost delirious.

"Why, plugged up two on 'em. There's only one more," he answered.

"One more what?"

"Leaks--holes--whatever you call 'em."

So saying, he shouldered his way back into the gloom.

It was now all as clear as daylight to me. I waited some minutes,
bursting with impatience and anxiety, during which I heard him
hammering away like a caulker. My fear was that the men would discover
that they had omitted to put a compass in the boats, and that they
would return for one. There were other things, too, of which they might
perceive the omission, and row to the ship to obtain them before she
sank.

Just as I was about to cry out to him to bear a hand, the boatswain's
face gleamed under the hatchway.

"Have you done?" I exclaimed.

"Ay, ay."

"Is she tight?"

"Tight as a cocoa-nut."

"Up with you, then! There is a bit of a breeze blowing. Let us swing
the mainyards and get way upon the ship. They are waiting to see her
settle before they up sail. It is dark enough to act. Hurrah, now!"

He came up through the forecastle and followed me on to the main-deck.

Though not yet dark, the shadow of the evening made it difficult to
distinguish faces even a short distance off. There was a pretty little
wind up aloft rounding the royals and top-gallant sails, and flattening
the sails on the mainyards well against the masts.

I stopped a second to look over the bulwarks, and found that the boats
still remained at about three cable-lengths from the ship. They had
slipped the mast in the long-boat; but I noticed that the two boats
lay side by side, four men in the quarter-boat, and the rest in the
long-boat, and that they were handing out some of the stores which had
been stowed in the quarter-boat, to lighten her.

"We must lose no time, Mr. Royle," exclaimed the boatswain. "How many
hands can we muster?"

"Three."

"That'll do. We can swing the mainyard. Who's the third?--the steward?
Let's have him out."

I ran to the cuddy and called the steward. He came out of the pantry.

"On to the poop with you!" I cried. "Right aft you'll find the bo'sun
there. Miss Robertson!"

At the sound of her name she stepped forth from her cabin.

"The men are out of the ship," I exclaimed. "We are ready to get way
upon her. Will you take the wheel at once?"

She was running on to the poop before the request was well out of my
mouth.

The boatswain had already let go the starboard main-braces; and as I
rushed aft he and the steward were hauling to leeward. I threw the
whole weight of my body on the brace, and pulled with the strength of
two men.

"Put the wheel to starboard!" I called out; and the girl, having cast
off the lashing with marvellous quickness, ran the spokes over.

"By God, she's a wonder!" cried the boatswain, looking at her.

And so was he. The muscles on his bare arms stood up like lumps of iron
under the flesh as he strained the heavy brace.

The great yards swung easily; the topsail, top-gallant, and royal yards
came round with the mainyard, and swung themselves when the sails
filled.

There was no time to gather in the slack of the lee-braces. I ran to
windward, belayed the braces, and raised a loud cry.

"They're after us, bo'sun!--they're after us!"

We might have been sure of that; for if we had not been able to
see them we could have heard them: the grinding of the oars in the
rowlocks, the frothing of the water at the boat's bows, the cries and
oaths of the men in the long-boat, inciting the others to overtake us.

Only the quarter-boat was in pursuit as yet; but in the long-boat they
were rigging up the stun'-sail they had shipped, meaning, as they were
to windward, to bear down upon us.

There was no doubt that they guessed their scheme had been baffled by
discerning _three_ men on deck. The carpenter at least knew that old
Mr. Robertson was too ill to leave his cabin, and failing _him_ he
would instantly perceive that a trick had been played; and though he
could not tell in that light and at that distance who the third man
was, he would certainly know that this third man's presence on board
implied the existence of a plot to save the ship.

As the boat approached I perceived that she was rowed by four men and
steered by a fifth, and presently, hearing his voice, I understood that
this man steering was Stevens.

The ship had just got way enough upon her to answer her helm. Already
we were drawing the long-boat away from our beam on to the quarter.

I shouted to Miss Robertson "Steady! keep her straight as she is!" for
even now we had brought the wind too far aft for the trim of the yards.

"Steward," I cried, "whip out one of those iron belaying-pins, and
stand by to hammer away."

We then posted ourselves, the boatswain and the steward at the gangway,
and I half-way up the poop ladder, each with a heavy belaying-pin
in his hand, ready to receive the scoundrels who were making for the
starboard main-chains.

The boat, urged furiously through the water, came up to us hand over
fist, the carpenter cursing us furiously, and swearing that he would do
for us yet.

I got my pistol ready, meaning to shoot the ruffian the moment he
should be within reach of the weapon, but abandoned this intention from
a motive of hate and revenge. I knew if I killed him as he sat there in
the stern sheets, that the others would take fright and run away; and
such was my passion, and the sense of our superiority over them from
our position in the ship as against theirs in the boat, that I made up
my mind to let them come alongside and get into the chains, so that we
might kill them all as a warning to the occupants of the long-boat, who
were now coming down upon us before the breeze.

I took one glance at Miss Robertson: her figure was visible by the side
of the wheel. She was steering as steadily as any sailor, and, with an
emotion of gratitude to God for giving us such help, and her so much
courage at this supreme moment, I addressed all my energies to the
bloody work before me.

The boat dashed alongside, and the men threw in their oars. The fellow
in the bow grabbed hold of one of the chain-plates, passed the boat's
painter around it, hauled it short and made it fast with incredible
activity and speed. Then pulling their knives out of the sheaths they
all came clambering into the main-chains.

So close as they now were, I could make out the faces of the men. One
was big Johnson, another Cornish, the third Fish, the fourth, Schmidten.

I alone was visible. The boatswain and the steward stood with uplifted
arms ready to strike at the first head that showed itself.

The carpenter sprang on to the bulwark just where I stood. He poised
his knife to stab me under the throat.

"Now, you murderous treacherous ruffian!" I cried at the top of my
voice, "say your prayers!"

I levelled the pistol at his head, the muzzle not being a yard away
from his face, and pulled the trigger. The bright flash illuminated him
like a ray of lightning. He uttered a scream shrill as a child's, but
terrific in intensity, clapped his hands to his face, and fell like a
stone into the main-chains.

"It is your turn now!" I roared to Johnson, and let fly at him. He was
holding on to one of the main shrouds in the act of springing on to
the deck. I missed his head, but struck him in the arm, I think; for
he let go the shroud with a deep groan, reeled backwards, and toppled
overboard, and I heard the heavy splash of his body as he fell.

But we were not even now three to three, but three to one; for the
boatswain had let drive with his frightful belaying-pin at Fish's head,
just as that enormous protuberance had shown itself over the bulwark,
and the wretch lay dead or stunned in the boat alongside; whilst the
steward, who had secreted a huge carving-knife in his bosom, had
stabbed the Dutchman right in the stomach, leaving the knife in him;
and the miserable creature hung over the bulwark, head and arms hanging
down towards the water, and suddenly writhing as he thus hung, dropped
overboard.

Cornish, of all five men alone lived. I had watched him aim a blow at
the boatswain's back, and fired, but missed him. But he too had missed
his aim, and the boatswain, slueing round, struck his wrist with the
belaying-pin--whack! it sounded like the blow of a hammer on wood--and
the knife fell from his hand.

"Mercy! spare my life!" he roared, seeing that I had again covered him,
having two more shots left.

The steward, capable, now that things had gone well with us, of
performing prodigies of valour, rushed upon him, laid hold of his legs,
and pulled him off the bulwark on to the deck.

I thought the fall had broken his back, for he lay groaning and
motionless.

"Don't kill him," I cried. "Make his hands fast and leave him for the
present. We may want him by-and-by."

The boatswain whipped a rope's end round him and shoved him against the
rail, and then came running up the poop ladder, wiping the streaming
perspiration from his face.

The breeze was freshening, and the boat alongside wobbled and splashed
as the ship towed her through the water.

I ran aft and stared into the gloom astern. I could see nothing of the
long-boat. I looked again and again, and fetched the night-glass, and
by its aid, sure enough, I beheld her, a smudge on the even ground of
the gloom, standing away close to the wind, for this much I could tell
by the outline of her sail.

"Miss Robertson!" I cried, "we are saved! Yonder is the long-boat
leaving us. Our lives are our own!"

"I bless God for His mercy," she answered quietly. But then her pent-up
feelings mastered her; she rocked to and fro, grasping the spokes
of the wheel, and I extended my arms just in time to save her from
falling.

"Bo'sun!" I shouted, and he came hurrying to me. "Miss Robertson has
fainted! Reach me a flag out of that locker."

He handed me a signal-flag, and I laid the poor girl gently down upon
the deck with the flag for a pillow under her head.

"Fetch me some brandy, bo'sun. The steward will give you a wine-glass
full."

And with one hand upon the wheel to steady the ship, I knelt by the
girl's side, holding her cold fingers, with so much tenderness and love
for her in my heart, that I could have wept like a woman to see her
lying so pale and still.

The boatswain returned quickly, followed by the steward. I surrendered
the wheel to the former, and taking the brandy, succeeded in
introducing some into her mouth. By dint of this and chafing her hands
and moistening her forehead, I restored her to consciousness. I then,
with my arm supporting her, helped her into the cuddy; but I did not
stay an instant after this, for there was plenty of work to be done on
deck; and though we had escaped one peril, yet here we might be running
headlong into another, for the ship was under full sail; we had but
three men to work her, not counting Cornish, of whose willingness or
capacity to work after his rough handling I as yet knew nothing. The
glass stood low, and if a gale should spring up and catch us as we
were, it was fifty to one if the ship did not go to the bottom.

"Bo'sun," I exclaimed, "what's to be done now?"

"Shorten sail whilst the wind's light, that's sartin," he answered.
"But the first job must be to get Cornish out of his lashin's and set
him on his legs. He must lend us a hand."

"Yes; we'll do that," I replied. "Steward, can you steer?"

"No, sir," responded the steward.

"Oh, damn it!" exclaimed the boatswain. "I'd rather be a guffy than a
steward," meaning by guffy a marine.

"Well," cried I, "you must try."

"But I know nothing about it, sir."

"Come here and lay hold of these spokes. Look at that card--no, by
Jove! you can't see it."

But the binnacle lamp was trimmed, and in a moment the boatswain
had pulled out a lucifer match, dexterously caught the flame in his
hollowed hands and fired the mesh.

"Look at that card," I said, as the boatswain shipped the lamp.

"I'm a lookin', sir."

"Do you see that it points south-east?"

"Yes, sir."

"If those letters S.E. swing to the left of the lubber's point--that
black mark there--pull the spokes to the left until S.E. comes to the
mark again. If S.E. goes to the right, shove the spokes to the right.
Do you understand?"

"Yes, I think I do, sir."

"Mind your eye, steward. Don't let those letters get away from you, or
you'll run the ship into the long-boat, and bring all hands on board
again."

And leaving him holding on to the wheel with the fear, and in the
attitude of a cockney clinging for his life, the boatswain and I walked
to the main-deck.

Cornish lay like a bundle against the rail. When he saw us he cried
out--

"Kill me if you like; but for God's sake loosen this rope first! It's
keepin' my blood all in one place!"

"How do you know we haven't come to drown you?" cried the boatswain in
an awful voice. "Don't jaw us about your blood. You won't want none in
five minutes."

"Then the Lord have mercy upon my soul!" groaned the poor wretch, and
let drop his head which he had lifted out of the scuppers to address us.

"Drownin's too easy for the likes o' you," continued the boatswain.
"You want whippin' and picklin', and then quarterin' arterwards."

"We are willing to spare your life," said I, feeling that we had no
time to waste, "if you will give us your word to help us to work this
ship, and bring her into port if we get no assistance on the road."

"I'll do anything if you'll spare my life," moaned he, "and loose this
rope round my middle."

"Do you think he's to be trusted, Mr. Royle?" said the boatswain, in
a stern voice, playing a part. "There's a bloodthirsty look on his
countinunce, and his eyes are full o' murder."

"Only try me!" groaned Cornish, faintly.

"He wur Stevens' chief mate," continued the boatswain; "an' I think it
'ud be wiser to leave him as he is for a few hours whilst we consider
the adwisability of trustin' of him."

"Then I shall be cut in halves," moaned Cornish.

"Well," I exclaimed, pretending first to reflect, "we will try you; and
if you act honestly by us you shall have no cause to complain. But if
you attempt to play false, we will treat you as you deserve; we will
shoot you as we shot your mates, and pitch your body overboard. So
you'll know what to expect. Bos'un, cast him adrift."

He was speedily liberated, and the boatswain hoisted him on to his
feet, when finding him very shaky, I fetched a glass of rum from the
pantry, which he swallowed.

"Thank you, sir," said he, rubbing his wrist, which the boatswain had
struck during the conflict. "I'll be honest and do what I can. You may
trust me to work for you. This here mutiny belonged to all hands, and
was no one man's, unless it were Stevens'; and I'd rather be here than
in the long-boat."

"Bo'sun," said I, cutting the fellow short, "the carpenter made the
port quarter-boat useless by knocking some planks out of her. We ought
to get the boat alongside in board while the water's smooth--we may
want her."

"Right you are, Mr. Royle," said he. "Pay us out a rope's end, will
you, and I'll drop her under the davits?"

And, active as a cat, he scrambled into the main-chains.

But on a sudden I heard a heavy splash.

"My God!" I cried "he's fallen overboard!" And I was rushing towards
the poop when I heard him sing out, "Hallo! here's another!" and this
was followed by a second splash.

I got on to the bulwarks and bawled to him, "Where are you? What are
you doing? Are you bathing?"

"The deuce a bit," he answered. "It was one o' them blessed mutineers
in the main-chains, and here was another in the boat. I pitched 'em
into the water. Now then, slacken gently, and belay when I sing out."

In a few moments the boat was under the davits and both falls hooked
on. Then up came the boatswain, and the three of us began to hoist,
manning first one fall, and then the other, bit by bit, until the boat
was up; but she was a heavy load, with her freight of provisions and
water--too precious to us to lose--and we panted, I promise you, by the
time she was abreast of the poop rail.

"Mr. Bo'sun," said Cornish, suddenly, "beggin' your pardon--I thought
you was dead."

"Did you, Jim Cornish?"

"I thought you was drownded, sir."

"Well, I ain't the fust drownded man as has come to life agin."

"All hands, Mr. Bo'sun, thought you was overboard, lyin' drownded. You
_was_ overboard?"

"And do you think I'm going to explain?" answered the boatswain,
contemptuously.

"It terrified me to see you, sir."

"Well, perhaps I ain't real arter all. How do you know? Seein' ain't
believin', so old women say."

"I don't believe in ghosts; but I thought you was one, Mr. Bo'sun, and
so did big Johnson when he swore you was one of the three at the port
main-braces."

"Well, I ain't ashamed o' bein' a shadder. Better men nor me have been
shadders. I knew a ship-chandler as wos a churchwarden and worth a mint
o' money, who became a shadder, and kept his wife from marryin' William
Soaper, o' the Coopid public-house Love Lane, Shadwell High Street, by
standin' at the foot of her bed every night at eight bells. He had a
cast in wun eye, Mr. Royle, and that's how his wife knew him."

"Well, I'll say no more--but my hair riz when you turned an' hit me
over the arm. I thought you couldn't be substantial like."

"'Cause you didn't get enough o' my belaying-pin," rejoined the
boatswain, with a loud laugh. "Wait till you turn dusty agin, mate, and
then you'll see wot a real ghost can do."

Just then Miss Robertson emerged from the companion. I ran to her and
entreated her to remain below--though for an hour only.

"No, no," she answered, "let me help you. I am much better--I am quite
well now. I can steer the ship while you take in some of the sails, for
I know there are too many sails set if wind should come."

Then, seeing Cornish, she started and held my arm, whispering, "Who is
he? Have they come on board?"

I briefly explained, and then renewed my entreaties that she should
remain in her cabin; but she said she would not leave the deck, even if
I refused her permission to steer, and pleaded so eloquently, holding
my arm and raising her sweet eyes to my face, that I reluctantly gave
way.

She hastened eagerly to take the steward's place, and I never saw any
man resign a responsible position more willingly than he.

I now explained to the boatswain that the glass stood very low, and
that we must at once turn to and get in all the sail we could hand.

I asked Cornish if he thought he was able to go aloft, and on his
answering in the affirmative, first testing the strength of his wrist
by hanging with his whole weight to one of the rattlins on the mizzen
rigging, we went to work to clew up the three royals.

I knew that the steward was of no use aloft, and never even asked him
if he would venture his hand at it, for I was pretty sure he would lose
his head and tumble overboard before he had mounted twenty feet, and
he was too useful to us to lose right off in that way.

Cornish went up to stow the mizzen-royal, and the boatswain and I went
aloft to the main-royal. The breeze was still very gentle and the ship
slipping smoothly through the black space of sea; but when we were on
the main-royal yard I called the attention of the boatswain to the
appearance of the sky in the north-west, for it was lightning faintly
in that direction, and the pale illumination sufficed to expose a huge
bank of cloud stretching far to the north.

"We shall be able to get the top-gallant sails off her," he said, "and
the jibs and staysails. But I don't know how we're going to furl the
mainsail, and it'll take us all night to reef the topsails."

"We must work all night," I answered, "and do what we can. Just tell
me, whilst I pass this gasket, how you managed in the hold."

"Why," he answered, "you know I took a kind o' crow-bar down with me,
and I reckoned on splittin' open the head of the fust chap as should
drop through the forescuttle. But turnin' it over in my mind, I thought
it 'ud be dangerous to kill the feller, as his mates might take it into
their heads to wait for him. And so I determined to hide myself when I
heerd the cove comin', and stand by to plug up the holes arter he wur
gone."

Here he discharged some tobacco-juice from his mouth, and dried his
lips on the sail.

"Werry well; I had my knife with me an' a box o' matches, and werry
useful they wos. I made a bit of a flare by combing out a strand of
yarns and settin' fire to it, and found wot was more pleasin' to my eye
than had I come across a five-pun note--I mean a spare broom-stick,
which I found knockin' about in the coal-hole; and I cut it into
pieces and pointed 'em ready to sarve. I knew who ever 'ud come, would
use an auger, and know'd the size hole it 'ud cut; and by-and-by, but
the Lord knows how long it were afore it happened, I hears some one
drop down the forescuttle and strike a match and light a bit o' candle
end. I got behind the bulkhead, where there was a plank out, and I see
the carpenter wurking away with his auger, blowin' and sweatin' like
any respectable hartizan earnin' of honest wages. By-and-by the water
comes rushin' in; and then he bores another hole and the water comes
through that; and then he bores another hole, arter which he blows out
his candle and goes away, scramblin' up on deck. My fingers quivered to
give him one for hisself with the end o' my crow-bar over the back of
his head. However, no sooner did he clear out than I struck a match,
fits in the bits of broom-stick, and stops the leaks as neatly as he
made 'em. I thought they'd hear me drivin' of them plugs in, and that
was all I was afraid of. But the ship's none the worse for them holes.
She's as tight as ever she wos: an' I reckon' if she gets no more water
in her than 'll come through them plugs, she won't be in a hurry to
sink."

I laughed, and we shook hands heartily.

I often think over that: the immense height we looked down from; the
mystical extent of black water mingling with the far-off sky; the faint
play of lightning on the horizon; the dark hull of the ship far below,
with the dim radiance of the cuddy lamps upon the skylights; the brave,
sweet girl steering us, and we two perched on a dizzy eminence, shaking
hands!




CHAPTER XI.


Cornish had stowed the mizzen-royal by the time we had reached the
deck, and when he joined us we clewed up the fore top-gallant sail, so
that we might hand that sail when we had done with the royal.

I found this man quite civil and very willing, and in my opinion he
spoke honestly when he declared that he had rather be with us than in
the long-boat.

The lightning was growing more vivid upon the horizon; that is, when
I looked in that direction from the towering height of the fore-royal
yard; and it jagged and scored with blue lines the great volume and
belt of cloud that hung to the sea. The wind had slightly freshened,
but still it remained a very gentle breeze, and urged the ship
noiselessly through the water.

The stars were few and languishing as you may sometimes have seen them
on a summer's night in England when the air is sultry and the night
dull and thunderous. All the horizon round was lost in gloom, save
where the lightning threw out at swift intervals the black water-line
against the gleaming background of cloud.

When we again reached the deck we were rather scant of breath, and I,
being unused of late to this kind of exercise, felt the effects of it
more than the others.

However, if it was going to blow a gale of wind as the glass
threatened, it was very advisable that we should shorten sail now that
it was calm; for assuredly three men, even though working for their
lives as we were, would be utterly useless up aloft when once the
weather got bad.

We went into the cuddy and took all three of us a sup of rum to give us
life, and I then said, "Shall we turn to and snug away aft since we are
here?"

They agreed; so we went on the poop and let go the mizzen top-gallant
and topsail halliards, roused out the reef-tackles, and went aloft,
where we first stowed the top-gallant sail, and then got down upon the
topsail-yard.

It was a hard job tying in all three reefs, passing the earrings and
hauling the reef-bands taut along the yard; but we managed to complete
the job in about half an hour.

Miss Robertson remained at the wheel all this time, and the steward was
useful on deck to let go any ropes which we found fast.

"It pains me," I said to the girl, "to see you standing here. I know
you are worn out, and I feel to be acting a most unmanly part in
allowing you to have your way."

"You cannot do without me. Why do you want to make your crew smaller in
number than it is?" she answered, smiling with the light reflected from
the compass card upon her face. "Look at the lightning over there! I'm
sailor enough to know that our masts would be broken if the wind struck
the ship with all this sail upon her. And what is _my_ work--idly
standing here--compared to yours--you, who have already done so much,
and are still doing the work of many men?"

"You argue too well for my wishes. I want you to agree with me."

"Whom have you to take my place here?"

"Only the steward."

"He cannot steer, Mr. Royle; and I assure you the ship wants watching."

I laughed at this nautical language in her sweet mouth, and said--

"Well, you shall remain here a little while longer."

"One thing," she exclaimed, "I will ask you to do--to look into our
cabin and see if papa wants anything."

I ran below and peeped into the cabin. She had already lighted the lamp
belonging to it, and so I was able to see that the old gentleman was
asleep. I procured some brandy-and-water and biscuit and also a chair,
and returned on deck.

"Your father is asleep," said I, "so you may make your mind easy
about him. Here are some refreshments--and see, if I put this chair
here you can sit and hold the wheel steady with one hand. There is no
occasion to remain on your feet. Keep that star yonder--right over
the yard-arm," pointing it out to her. "That is as good a guide as the
compass for the time being. We need only keep the sails full. I can
shape no course as yet, though we shall haul round the moment we have
stripped more canvas off her."

I now heard the voices of Cornish and the boatswain right away far out
in the darkness ahead, and running forward on to the forecastle, I
found them stowing the flying jib.

To save time I let go the outer and inner jib-halliards, and, with
the assistance of the steward, hauled these sails down. He and I also
clewed up the main top-gallant-sail, took the main tack and sheet to
the winch and got them up, rounded up the leechlines and buntlines as
well as we could, and then belayed and went forward again. I let go the
fore-topsail halliards and took the ends of the reef-tackles to the
capstan, and whilst the two others were tackling the outer jib, the
steward and I hauled down the main-topmast staysail, and snugged it as
best we could in the netting.

These tasks achieved, I got upon the bowsprit, and gave the two men a
hand to stow the jibs.

"Now mates," I cried, "let's get upon the fore-topsail yard and see
what we can do there."

And up we went, and in three quarters of an hour, with the help of
a jigger, we had hauled out the earrings and tied every blessed
reef-point in the sail.

But this was the finishing touch to our strength, and Cornish was so
exhausted that I had to help him over the top down the fore rigging.

We had indeed accomplished wonders: close-reefed two of the three
topsails, stowed the three jibs, the three royals, two top-gallant
sails and staysails. Our work was rendered three times harder than it
need have been by the darkness; we had to fumble and grope, and, by
being scarcely able to see each other, we found it extremely difficult
to work in unison; so that, instead of hauling altogether, we hauled
at odd times, and rendered our individual strength ineffectual, when,
could we have collectively exerted it, we should have achieved our
purpose easily.

"I must sit down for a spell, sir," said Cornish. "I can't do no more
work yet."

"If we could only get that top-gallant sail off her," I exclaimed,
looking longingly up at it. But all the same, I felt that a whole
regiment of bayonets astern of me could not have urged me one inch up
the shrouds.

We dragged our weary limbs aft and squatted ourselves near the wheel, I
for one being scarcely able to stand.

"Mr. Royle," said Miss Robertson, "will you and the others go down into
the cabin and get some sleep? I will keep watch, and promise faithfully
to wake you the moment I think necessary."

"Bo'sun," I exclaimed, "do you hear that? Miss Robertson wants us to
turn in. She will keep watch, she says, and call us if a gale comes!"

"God bless her!" said the boatswain. "I called her a wonder just now,
and I'll call her a wonder again. So she is! and though she hears me
speak, and may think me wantin' in good manners, I'll say this--an'
tired as I am I'd fight the man now as he stood who'd contradict
me--that she's just one o' the best--mind, Jim, I say the best--o' the
werry properest kind o' gals as God Almighty ever made, a regular real
woman to the eye, and a sailor in her heart. And by the livin' Moses,
Jim, if you can tell me now to my face that you would ha' let her sink
in this here wessel, I'll chuck you overboard, you willin! so say it!"

"I don't want to say it," muttered Cornish, penitentially. "I never
thought o' the lady. I forgot she were on board. Mr. Bo'sun, don't
say no more about it, please. I've done my duty I hope, Mr. Royle.
I've worked werry hard considerin' my bad wrist. I'd liefer fight for
the lady than agin her, now that I see wot she's made of. 'Bygones is
bygones,' as the cock as had his eye knocked out in a fight said, when
he looked about and couldn't see nothen of it; and if you call me a
willin, well and good; I'll not arguey, for I dare say you ain't fur
wrong, mate."

"Mr. Royle, you have not answered me. Will you and the others lie down
and sleep whilst I watch?"

"Not yet, Miss Robertson. By-and-by, perhaps. We have more work before
us, and are only resting. Steward!"

He came from behind the companion, where I think he had fallen asleep.

"Yes, Mr. Royle, sir."

"Cut below and mix all hands a jug of brandy-and-water, and bring some
biscuits. Here, bo'sun, is some tobacco. Smoke a pipe. Fire away,
Cornish. It's more soothing than sleep, mates."

"The lightning's growin' rayther powerful," said the boatswain, looking
astern as he loaded his pipe.

"Don't it look as if it wur settin' away to the eastards?" exclaimed
Cornish.

"No," I replied, watching the lurid gleams lighting up the piled-up
clouds. "It's coming after us dead on end, though slowly enough."

I pulled out my watch and held it close to the binnacle.

"Half-past two!" I cried, amazed at the passage of time. "Upon my word,
I didn't think it was twelve o'clock yet. Miss Robertson, I know I
cannot induce you to go below; but you must allow me to relieve you for
a spell at the wheel. I can sit and steer as well as you. You'll find
this grating comfortable."

Saying which I pulled out some flags from the locker, made a kind of
cushion for her back, and I then took her chair, keeping the wheel
steady with my foot.

There was less wind than there had been half an hour before; enough to
give the vessel steerage-way, and that was all.

We were heading S.E., the wind, or what there was of it, upon the
port-quarter. There was every promise of a calm falling again, and
this I should not have minded, nor the lightning either, which might
well have been the play of a passing thunderstorm, had it not been for
the permanent depression of the mercury.

The air was very warm, but less oppressive than it had been; the sea
black and even, and the heavens with a stooping, murky aspect.

It was some comfort to me, however, to look aloft, and see the amount
of canvas we had taken off the ship. If we could only manage to pull
up our strength again, we might still succeed in furling the main
top-gallant sail, and reefing the topsail before change of weather came.

The steward made his appearance with the spirits and biscuit; and Miss
Robertson went below, whispering to me as she passed, that she wished
to look at her father, and that she would return in a few minutes.

"Now that the lady's gone, Mr. Royle," exclaimed the boatswain as soon
as she had left the deck, "let's talk over our situation, and think
what's to be done."

The steward squatted himself on his hams like a coolie, and posed
himself in an attitude of eager attention.

"Quite right, bo'sun," I replied. "I have been thinking during the time
we have been at work, and will tell you what my plans are. At noon
yesterday--that will be fifteen hours ago--the Bermuda Islands bore as
true as a hair west-half-south. We hove to with the ship's head to the
norrard and westward, and made some way at that, and taking the run
we have made to-night, I allow that if we head the ship west by north
we shall make the islands, with anything like a breeze, some time on
Monday morning."

"But, if we're just off the coast of Florida," said Cornish, "why
couldn't we turn to and run for the West Indie Islands?"

"Which is nearest, I wonders," exclaimed the boatswain, "the West
Hindie Islands or the kingdom of Jericho?"

"It's 'ardly a time for jokin'," remonstrated the steward.

"I don't know that I said anything funny," observed Cornish, warmly.

"Well, then, wot do you mean by talking o' the West Hindie Islands?"
cried the boatswain.

"Wot do I mean?" retorted the other; "why, wot I says. Here we are off
the coast of Floridy----"

"Off the coast o' your grandmother! Shut up, mate, and let Mr. Royle
speak. You know nothen about it."

"The Bermudas are nearer to hand than the West Indies," I continued,
not choosing to explain. "What we have to do, then, the moment we can
use our legs, is to haul the ship round. How is the wind now? N.N.W.
Well, she will lie properly. And as soon as ever it comes daybreak, we
must run up a signal of distress, and keep it flying. What more can we
do?"

"I suppose," said the boatswain, doubtfully, sucking so hard at his
pipe that it glowed like a steamer's red light under his nose, "you
wouldn't like to wenture on a run to the English Channel, Mr. Royle?
It would be airning some kind o' fame, and perhaps a trifle o' money
from the owners, if it wur to git about that three hands--well, I'll
ax the steward's pardon, and say four--that four hands brought this
here blessed ship and her walleyable cargo out o' a rigular knock-down
mutiny, all aways up the Atlantic Ocean, into the Henglish Channel, and
landed her safe in the West Hindie Docks. I never see my name in print
in my life----"

"What's your true name, Mr. Bo'sun?" inquired the steward.

"Joshua, or Jo Forward, young feller; sometimes called Forrard,
sometimes Jo, and on Sundays Mister."

"I know a Forward as lives at Blackwall," said the steward.

"Do yer? Well, then, now you knows two. Wot I was sayin', Mr. Royle,
was, I never see my name in print in my life, and I should like to see
it regular wrote down in the newspapers. Lloyd's is always my weekly
pennorth ashore."

He knocked the hot ashes into the palm of his hand, scrutinised it
earnestly to see that there was no tobacco left in it, and tossed it
away.

"A good deal, sir," said the steward, in a thin voice, "is to be said
about the lady we saved. The saving of her alone, would make 'eros of
us in the public mind."

"Wot do you call us--'eros?" exclaimed the boatswain.

"Yes, sir, 'eros!"

"What's the meaning of that word, Mr. Royle?--any relation to earwigs?"

"He means heroes," I replied. "Don't you, steward?"

"I did more than mean it--I said it, sir," exclaimed the steward.

"That's how the Chaneymen talk, and quarrel with you for not followin'
of their sense. Wot do you think of my notion, Jim, of sailin' this
wessel to England?" said the boatswain.

Cornish made no answer. I saw him, in the pale light diffused around
the binnacle, wipe his mouth with the back of his hand, and shift
uneasily on his seat. I could scarcely wonder that the boatswain's idea
should make him feel uncomfortable.

"Your scheme," said I, "would be a capital one providing that every
man of us four had six hands and six legs, and the strength of three
big Johnsons, that we could do without sleep, and split ourselves into
pieces whenever we had occasion to reef topsails. But, as I am only
capable of doing one man's work, and require rest like other weakly
mortals, I must tell you plainly that I for one should be very sorry to
undertake to work this ship to the English Channel, unless you would
guarantee that by dawn this morning we should receive a draft of at
least six men out of a passing vessel."

"Well, well," said the boatswain, "it was only a thought; and I don't
say it is to be done."

"Not to be thought on--much less done," exclaimed Cornish.

"Don't be too sartin, friend," retorted the boatswain, turning smartly
on him. "'Where there's a will there's a way,' wos a sayin' when I was
a lad."

"If it comes on to blow," I put in, "it may take us all we can do to
fetch Bermuda. Don't dream of aiming for a further port."

At this moment Miss Robertson returned. I asked her how she had found
her father, and she replied, in a low voice, that he was sleeping, but
that his breathing was very faint and uncertain, and that he sometimes
talked in his sleep.

She could not disguise her anxiety, and I entreated her to go below and
watch him and rest herself as well; but she answered that she would not
leave the deck until I had finished taking in sail and doing what was
necessary.

"You cannot tell me that I am not of use," she added. "I will steer
whilst you work, and if you wish to sleep I will watch for you. Why
should I not do so? I can benefit papa more by helping you to save
the ship than by leaving you to work alone while I sit with him. I
pray God," she said, in her sweet, low, troubled voice, "that all may
go well with us. But I have been so near to death that it scarcely
frightens me now. Tell me what to do and I will do it--though for your
sake alone, as you would have sacrificed your life for mine. I owe you
what I can never repay--and how kind, how gentle, how good you have
been to my father and me!"

She spoke in so low a voice that it was impossible for any one to hear
her but myself; and so greatly did her words effect me--I, who had now
learnt to love her, who could indeed have died a hundredfold over for
her dear sake, that I dared not trust myself to speak. Had I spoken I
should have said what I was sure she would have disliked to hear from
a rough sailor like me: nay, I even turned away from her that I might
be silent, recoiling from my own heart's language that seemed but an
impertinence, an unfair obtrusion of claims which, even though she
admitted them by speaking of my having saved her life, I should have
been unmanly to assert.

I quickly recovered myself, and said, forcing a laugh--

"You are as bad a mutineer as the others. But as you will not obey me,
I must obey you."

And looking for some moments at the ponderous bank of cloud in the
north-west, of which the gathering brightness and intensity of the
lightning was illustrating its steady approach, I exclaimed--

"Are we strong enough to turn to, mates?"

"We can douse that top-gallant sail, I dare say," answered the
boatswain. "Up on your pins, steward."

And we trooped along to the main-deck.

The spell of rest, and perhaps the grog, not to mention the tobacco,
had done us no harm; the three of us went aloft, carrying the jigger
with us which we left in the main-top, and furled the top-gallant sail,
if not in man-of-war fashion and with a proper harbour bunt, at all
events very securely.

But the main-topsail was another matter. All three of us had to lay out
to windward to haul taut one earring; then skim along to the other end
of the yard to the other earring; and so up and down, and still more
reef-points and still more earrings, until my legs and fingers ached.

This job over, we rested ourselves in the main-top, and then got upon
the main-yard, and made shift to pass the yard-arm gaskets round the
sail and stow it after a fashion, though I had no doubt that the first
gale of wind that struck it would blow it clear of its lashings in a
minute.

Then on deck again with the main-topsail halliards to the capstan; and
the dawn found the ship under three close-reefed topsails, foresail,
and fore-topmast staysail, the whole of the other canvas having been
reefed and stowed by three worn-out men, one of whom had been pretty
nearly knocked up by the fight with the mutineers, the second of whom
was fresh from an imprisonment of three days in a close, stifling, and
rat-swarming coal-hole, whilst the third had received such a crack
on his wrist as would have sent any man but an English sailor to his
hammock and kept him ill and groaning for a month.


END OF VOL. II.


    LONDON:
    PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
    STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.




Transcriber's Notes:


Cover and Table of Contents created by Transcriber and placed in the
Public Domain.

Punctuation and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in the three volumes of this novel, or to remedy
simple typographical errors; otherwise they were not changed.

Dialect and other non-standard spellings have not been changed.

Spaces before the contraction "'ll" (for "will") have been retained.

Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines have been retained.

Page 82: "Sailors don't no nothing" is printed as "know" in a different
edition of this book.

Page 203: The closing quotation mark after "of them? He didn't
understand." perhaps should be after "of them?"






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK OF THE GROSVENOR, VOLUME 2 OF 3 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Wreck of the Grosvenor, Volume 2 of 3
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Wreck of the Grosvenor, Volume 2 of 3


Author: William Clark Russell

Release date: December 24, 2013 [eBook #44498]
                Most recently updated: November 3, 2015

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK OF THE GROSVENOR, VOLUME 2 OF 3 ***




Produced by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR."




                                  THE
                       WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR:"

                             AN ACCOUNT OF
                    _THE MUTINY OF THE CREW AND THE
                           LOSS OF THE SHIP_
                   WHEN TRYING TO MAKE THE BERMUDAS.

                          _IN THREE VOLUMES._
                                VOL. II.

                                LONDON:
               SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE & RIVINGTON,
                  CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET.
                                 1877.

                        (_All rights reserved._)




                                LONDON:
                  PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
                   STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.




THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR."




CHAPTER I.


As the men had been up all night, I recommended the carpenter to go to
them and tell them that the watches would not be altered, and that the
watch whose spell it was below should turn in.

Some, it appeared, asked that rum should be served out to them; but
the carpenter answered that none should be given them until breakfast
time, and that if they got talking too much about the drink, he'd run
a bradawl into the casks and let the contents drain out; for if the
men fell to drinking, the ship was sure to get into a mess, in which
case they might be boarded by the crew of another vessel and carried to
England, where nothing less than hanging or transportation awaited them.

This substantial advice from the lips of the man who had been foremost
in planning the mutiny produced a good effect, and the fellows who had
asked for spirits were at once clamorously assailed by their mates;
so that, in their temper, had the carpenter proposed to fling the rum
casks overboard, most of the hands would have consented and the thing
being done.

All this I was told by the boatswain, who had left the poop with the
carpenter, but returned before him. I took this opportunity of being
alone with the man to ask him some questions relative to the mutiny,
and particularly inquired if he could tell me what was that intention
which the man named "Bill" had asked the carpenter to communicate
to me, but which he had refused to explain. The boatswain, who was
at bottom a very honest man, declared that he had no notion of the
intention the carpenter was concealing, but promised to try and worm
the secret out of Johnson or others who were in it, and impart it to me.

He now informed me that he had come into the mutiny because he saw the
men were resolved, and also because they thought he took the captain's
part, which was a belief full of peril to him. He said that he could
not foresee how this trouble would end; for though the idea of the men
to quit the ship and make for the shore in open boats was feasible,
yet they would run very heavy risks of capture any way; for if they
came across a ship while in the boats they could not refuse to allow
themselves to be taken on board, where, some of the mutineers being
very gross and ignorant men, the truth would certainly leak out; whilst
as to escaping on shore, it was fifty to one if the answers they made
to inquiries would not differ so widely one from another as to betray
them.

But at this point our conversation was interrupted by the carpenter
coming aft to ask me to keep watch whilst he and the boatswain turned
in, as he for one was "dead beat," and would not be of any service
until he had rested.

It was now broad daylight, the east filled with the silver splendours
of the rising sun. I descried a sail to windward, on the starboard
tack, heading eastward. I made her out through the glass to be a small
topsail schooner, but as we were going free with a fresh breeze we soon
sank her hull.

The sight of this vessel, however, set me thinking on my own position.
What would be thought and how should I be dealt with when (supposing I
should ever reach land) I should come to tell the story of this mutiny?
But this was a secondary consideration. My real anxiety was to foresee
how the men would act when I had brought them to the place they wished
to arrive at. Would they give such a witness against their murderous
dealings as I was, a chance to save my life?--I, whose plain testimony
could set justice on the hunt for every one of them. I could not place
confidence in their assurances. The oaths of such ruffians as many of
them undoubtedly were, were worthless. They would murder me without an
instant's scruple if by so doing they could improve their own chances
of escape; and I was fully persuaded that I should have shared the
fate of Coxon and Duckling in spite of the sympathy I had shown them,
and their declaration that they did not want my life, had they not
foreseen that they would stand in need of some competent person to
navigate the ship for them, and that I was more likely to come into
their projects than either of the men they had murdered.

My agitation was greater than I like to admit; and I turned over in my
mind all sorts of ideas for my escape, but never forgetting the two
helpless persons whose lives I considered wholly dependent on my own
preservation.

At one moment I thought of taking the boatswain into my confidence,
stealthily storing provisions in one of the quarter-boats, and watching
an opportunity to sneak off with him and our passengers under cover of
night.

Then I thought of getting him to sound the minds of the crew, to judge
if there were any who might assist us should we rise upon the more
desperate of the mutineers.

Another notion was to pretend to mistake the ship's whereabouts, and
run her into some port.

But such stratagems as these, easily invented, were in reality
impracticable.

To let the men see that I stood to my work, I never quitted the deck
until six o'clock. The morning was then very beautiful, with a rich and
warm aroma in the glorious southerly breeze, and the water as blue as
the heavens.

On arousing the carpenter in the cabin formerly occupied by me (I found
him in the bunk on my mattress with his boots on, and a pipe belonging
to me in his hand), I told him that the ship could now carry all plain
sail, and advised him to make it. He got out of the bunk in a pretty
good temper, and went along the cuddy; but as he was about to mount
the companion-ladder I called to know if he would see the steward, and
speak to him about serving out the cuddy stores, as I preferred that
he should give the man instructions, since they would best represent
the wishes of the crew. But the truth was, I wanted to pack all the
responsibility that I could upon him, so as to make myself as little
answerable as possible to the men.

"Yes, yes. Fetch him out. Where is he?" he replied, turning round.

"Steward!" I called.

After a pause the door of the captain's cabin opened, and the figure of
the steward stepped forth. Such a woebegone object, with bloodless face
and haggard expression, and red eyes and quivering mouth, hands hanging
like an idiot's, his hair matted, his knees knocking together as he
walked, I never wish to see again.

"Now, young feller," said the carpenter (the steward, by the way, was
about forty years old), "what do you think ought to be done to you,
hey? Is hangin' too mild, or is drownin' more to your fancy? or would
you like to be di-sected by the cook, who is reckoned a neat hand at
carvin'?"

The steward turned his bloodshot eyes upon me, and his white lips moved.

"Mr. Stevens is only joking," I exclaimed, feeling that I would give a
year's pay to strike the ruffian to the earth for his brutal playing
with the miserable creature's terror. "He wants to talk to you about
the cuddy provisions."

The carpenter stared at him grimly, out of a mean tyranny and relish
of his fears; and the poor creature said, "Yes, sir?" lifting his eyes
humbly to the carpenter's face, and folding his hands in an involuntary
attitude of supplication.

"You'll understand, young feller," said the carpenter, thrusting his
hands into his pockets and leaning against the mizzen-mast, "that we're
all equals aboard this here wessel now. No one's above t'other, barring
yourself, who's just nowheeres at all, owin' to your keeping in tow of
the skipper when he was pisoning us with the stores which you, d----
yer! took joy in sarving out! Now, you understand this: you're to turn
to and sarve out the cuddy stores to the men at the proper time, and
three tots o' grog every day to each man. Mr. Ryle 'll tell you how
long our passage 'll last, and you're to make a calkilation of the live
stock so as each watch gits a share of the pigs an' poultry. But you,"
he continued, squirting some tobacco juice from his mouth, "aren't
to touch no other provisions but the stores which the crew's been
eatin' of: mind that! If we catch you tastin' so much as half a cuddy
biscuit, by the living thunder! we'll run you up to the fore-yard-arm!"

He shook his fist in the steward's face, and addressing me, said--

"That's all to be said, ain't it?"

"That's all," I replied; and the steward went cringing and reeling
towards the pantry, whilst the carpenter mounted the companion-ladder.

I entered the cabin, which, to save confusion, I will continue to call
the captain's cabin, and seated myself in a chair screwed down to the
deck before a wide table. This cabin was comfortably furnished with
hanging bookshelves, a fine map of the world, a few coloured prints of
ships, a handsome cot, and mahogany lockers cushioned on top to serve
for seats.

Among some writing materials, a case of mathematical instruments, a
boat's compass, and a variety of other matters which covered the
table, I observed an American five-chambered revolver, which, on
examining, I found was loaded. I at once put this weapon in my pocket,
and after searching awhile, discovered a box of cartridges, which I
also pocketed.

This I considered a very lucky find, as I never knew the moment when
I might stand in need of such a weapon; and whether I should have
occasion to use it or not, it was certainly better in my possession
than in the hands of the men.

I now left my chair to examine the lockers, in the hopes of finding
other firearms; and I cannot express the eagerness with which I
prosecuted the search, because I considered that, should the boatswain
succeed in winning even one man over from the crew, three resolute men,
each armed with a revolver or firearm of any kind, might, by carefully
waiting their opportunity, kill or wound enough of the crew to render
the others an easy conquest.

However, to my unspeakable disappointment, my search proved fruitless;
all that I found in the lockers were clothes belonging to Captain
Coxon, a quantity of papers, old charts, and log-books, some parcels of
cigars, and a bag containing about £30 in silver.

Whilst engaged in these explorations, a knock fell on the door, and on
my replying, the girl came in. I bowed and asked her to be seated, and
inquired how her father did.

"He is still very weak," she answered; "but he is not worse this
morning. I heard your voice just now, and watched you enter this cabin.
I hope you will let me speak to you. I have so much to say."

"Indeed," I replied, "I have been waiting impatiently for this
opportunity. Will you first tell me your name?"

"Mary Robertson. My father is a Liverpool merchant, Mr. Royle, and the
ship in which we were wrecked was his own vessel. Oh!" she exclaimed,
pressing her hands to her face, "we were many hours expecting every
moment to die. I cannot believe that we are saved! and sometimes I
cannot believe that what has happened is real! I think I was going
mad when I saw your ship. I thought the boat was a phantom, and that
it would vanish suddenly. It was horrible to be imprisoned with the
dead body and that mad sailor! The sailor went mad on the first day,
and soon afterwards the passenger--for he was a passenger who lay dead
on the deck--sat up in his bed and uttered a dreadful cry, and fell
forward dead. The mad sailor pointed to him and howled! and neither
papa nor I could get out of the house, for the water washed against it
and would have swept us overboard."

She told me all this with her hands to her face, and her fair hair
flowing over her shoulders, and made a sweet and pathetic picture in
this attitude.

Suddenly she looked up with a smile of wonderful sweetness, and,
seizing my hand, cried--

"What do we not owe you for your noble efforts? How good and brave you
are!"

"You praise me too warmly, Miss Robertson. God knows there was nothing
noble in my efforts, nor any daring in them. Had I really risked my
life to save you, I should still have barely done my duty. How were you
treated yesterday? Well, I hope."

"Oh yes. The captain told the steward to give us what we wanted. I
think the wine he sent us saved papa's life. He was sinking, but
rallied after he had drunk a little of it. I am in a sad plight," she
exclaimed, while a faint tinge of red came into her cheeks. "I have not
even a piece of ribband to tie up my hair with."

She took her beautiful hair in her hands, and smiled.

"Is there nothing in this cabin that will be of use to you?" I said.
"Here is a hair-brush--and it looks a pretty good one. I don't know
whether we shall be able to muster a bit of ribband among us, but I
just now came across a roll of serge, and if you can do anything with
that and a needle and thread, which I'll easily get for you, I'll see
that they are put in your cabin. Here are enough clothes to rig out
your father, at all events, until his own are made ship-shape. But how
am I to help _you_? That has been on my mind."

"I can use the serge if I may have it," she replied, in the prettiest
way imaginable.

"Here it is," I said, hauling it out of the locker; "and I'll get
needles and thread for you presently. No sailor goes to sea without a
housewife, and you shall have mine. And if you will wait a moment I
think I can find something else that may be useful."

Saying which I hurried to my old cabin, unlocked my chest, and took out
a new pair of carpet slippers.

"A piece of bunting or serge fitted into these will make them sit on
your feet," I exclaimed, handing them to her. "And I have other ideas,
Miss Robertson, all which I hope will help to make you a little more
comfortable by-and-by. Leave a sailor alone to find out ways and means."

She took the slippers with a graceful little smile, and put them
alongside the roll of serge; and then, with a grave face, and in an
earnest voice, she asked me to tell her what the men meant to do with
the ship now that they had seized her.

I freely told her as much as I knew, but expressed no fears as to
my own, and hers, and her father's safety. Indeed, I took the most
cheerful view I could of our situation.

"My notion," said I, "is that when the time comes for the men to leave
the ship they will not allow us to go with them. They will oblige us
to remain in her, which is the best thing that could happen; for I am
sure that the boatswain will stay, and with his and the steward's help
there is nothing to prevent us taking the ship into the nearest port,
or lying to until we sight a vessel, and then signalling for help."

I fancy she was about to express her doubts of this result, but
exclaimed instead--

"No matter what comes, Mr. Royle, we shall feel safe with you." And
then, suddenly rising, she asked me to come and see her father.

I followed her at once into the cabin.

The old man lay in an upper bunk, with a blanket over him. He looked
like a dead man, with his white face rendered yet more death-like in
appearance by the dishevelled white hair upon his head, and the long
white beard. He was lying perfectly still, with his eyes closed, his
thin hands folded outside the blanket.

I thought he slept, and motioned to his daughter; but she stooped and
whispered, "Papa, here is Mr. Royle;" whereupon he opened his eyes
and looked at me. The sense of my presence appeared to be very slowly
conveyed to his mind, and then he extended his hand. I took it, and saw
with emotion that tears streamed from his eyes.

"Sir," he exclaimed, in a weak faltering voice, "I can only say, God
bless you!"

I answered cheerfully, "Pray say no more, Mr. Robertson. I want to see
you recover your strength. Thank God, your daughter has survived her
horrible trials, and will soon quite recover from the effects of them.
What now can I do for you? Have you slept?"

"Yes, yes, I have slept; a little, I thank you. Sir, I have witnessed
shocking scenes."

I whispered to Miss Robertson--

"Let me prescribe some medicine that will do you both good. What you
both require is support. I will be with you in a minute."

So saying, I quitted the cabin and entered the pantry. There I found
the steward sitting on the plate chest, with his hands to his temples.

"Now then, my lad," said I; "rouse up. You are not dead yet. Have you
any brandy here?"

He pointed in a mechanical way to a shelf, where were several bottles.
I found what I wanted, and gave him a dose to put heart into him, and
asked him for some eggs. Four or five, the gathering of yesterday from
the kindly hens under the long-boat, lay in the drawer, which he pulled
open. I proceeded to mix two tumblers of eggs and brandy, which I
carried to the next cabin.

"This is my physic, Miss Robertson," I exclaimed, putting one of the
tumblers into her hand; "oblige me by drinking it; and you, sir,"
I continued, addressing the old gentleman, "will not wait for her
example."

They both, to my great satisfaction, swallowed the contents of the
glasses, the effect of which, after some moments, upon Mr. Robertson
was decidedly beneficial, for he thanked me for my kindness in a much
stronger voice, and even made shift to prop himself up on his elbow.

"It is the best tonic in the world," said I, taking Miss Robertson's
glass, "and I am very much obliged to you for your obedience."

The look she gave me was more eloquent than any verbal reply; at
least, I found it so. Her face was so womanly and beautiful, so full
of pathos in its pallor, with something so brave and open in its whole
expression, that it was delightful to me to watch it.

"Now," said I to the old gentleman, "allow me to leave you for a
little. I want to see what the _Grosvenor_ can furnish in the shape of
linen and drapery. Isn't that what they call it ashore? We have found
some serge, and needles and thread are easily got; and I'll set what
wits the unfortunate steward has left in him to work to discover how
Miss Robertson may be made comfortable until we put you both ashore."

"Do not leave us!" cried the old man. "Your society does me good, sir.
It puts life into me. I want to tell you who we are, and about our
shipwreck, and where we were going. The _Cecilia_ was my own vessel. I
am a merchant, doing most of my trade with the Cape--the Cape of Good
Hope. I took my daughter--my only child, sir--to Cape Town, last year,
for a change of scene and air; and I should have stopped another year,
but Mary got tired and wanted to get home, and--and--well, as I was
telling you, Mr--Mr.----"

"Royle," said Miss Robertson.

"Mr. Royle, as I was telling you, Mary got tired; and as the _Cecilia_
was loading at Cape Town--she was a snug sound ship--yes, indeed; and
we went on board, we and a gentleman named--named----"

"Jameson," his daughter suggested.

"Ay, poor Jameson--poor, poor fellow!"

He hid his face, and was silent, I should say, a whole minute,
neither Miss Robertson nor myself speaking. Presently, looking up, he
continued--

"It came on to blow very heavily, most suddenly, a dreadful gale. It
caught the ship in a calm, and she was unprepared, and it snapped all
three masts away. Oh, God, what a night of horror! The men went mad,
and cried that the ship was going stern down, and crowded into the
boats. One went whirling away into the darkness, and one was capsized;
and then the captain said the ship was sinking, and my daughter and
I ran out of the cabin on to the deck. Well, sir," continued the old
man, swallowing convulsive sobs as he spoke, "the ship's side had
been pierced, the captain said, by one of the yards; and she was
slowly settling, and the water came over the deck, and we got into the
house where you found us, for shelter. I put my head to the window and
called the captain to come, and as he was coming the water hurled him
overboard; and there were only myself and my poor girl and Mr. Jameson
and--and--tell him the rest!" he suddenly cried, hiding his eyes and
stretching out his hand.

"Another time, Miss Robertson," I exclaimed, seeing the look of horror
that had come into her face during her father's recital of the story.
"Tell me where you live in England, and let us fancy ourselves in the
dear old country, which, so it please God, we shall all reach safely in
a little time."

But they were both too overcome to answer me. The old man kept his
face concealed, and the girl drew long sobbing breaths with dry eyes.

However, she plucked up presently, and answered that they lived just
out of Liverpool, but that her father had also an estate at Leamington,
near Warwick, where her mother died, and where she spent most of her
time, as she did not like Liverpool.

"Tell me, sir," cried Mr. Robertson, "did you bring the body of poor
Jameson with you? I forget."

"If that was Mr. Jameson whose body lay in the deck-house," I replied,
"I left him on the wreck. There was his coffin, Mr. Robertson, and I
dared not wait to bring off a dead man when living creatures stood in
peril of their lives."

"To be sure, sir!" exclaimed the old gentleman. "You were very right.
You acted with great nobleness, and are most kind to us now--most
kind, Mary, is he not? Let me see?" knitting his brows. "You are not
captain of this ship? I think, my dear, you said that this gentleman
was the mate? Who is the captain, sir?"

His daughter put her finger to her mouth, which puzzled me until
I considered that she either did not want him to know that the
captain was murdered, or, supposing he knew of the murder, that the
circumstance should not be revived in his memory, which was just now
very feeble.

He did not wait for his question to be answered, but asked me where the
ship was bound to?

"New Orleans," I answered, with a glance at his daughter.

"New Orleans!" he exclaimed. "Let me think--that is beyond the West
Indies." And with great eagerness he said, "Will you put into one of
the West India Islands? I am known at Kingston; I have shipped largely
to a firm there, Messieurs Raymondi and Company. Why, my dear, we shall
be very well received, and we shall be able to purchase fresh clothes,"
he continued, holding up his arm and looking at it with a melancholy
smile, "and go home in one of the fine mail packets. Ha! ha! ha! how
things come about!"

He lay back upon his pillow with this short mirthless laugh, and
remained silent. I do not say that his mind was unhinged, but his
intellect was unquestionably impaired by the horrors he had witnessed
and the sufferings he had endured. But then he was an old man--nearer
seventy than sixty, I took him to be; whilst his daughter, whom a
little rest had put upon the high road to recovery, did not appear to
be above twenty years old.

As the time was passing rapidly, I determined to seize the opportunity
of the carpenter being on deck to do what I could to make these
sufferers comfortable. I therefore left them and sang out to the
steward, who came with terrified promptitude, casting the while
and almost at every step, fearful glances in the direction of the
main-deck, where some of the hands were visible.

I gave him the captain's hair-brush to wash, and covered a tray with
the various toilet conveniences with which the ill-fated skipper had
provided himself. These I dispatched by the steward to Miss Robertson,
and I then made the man prepare a tray with a substantial breakfast,
consisting of cold fowl, fine white biscuit, ham, preserved fruit, and
some tea, which I boiled in the pantry by means of a spirit-lamp that
belonged to me.

I took an immense pleasure in supplying these new friends' wants, and
almost forgot the perilous situation I was in, in the agreeable labour
of devising means to comfort the girl, whose life and her father's,
thanks to God, I had been instrumental in preserving.

I made a thorough overhaul of Coxon's effects, holding myself fully
privileged to use them for the benefit of poor Mr. Robertson, and sent
to his cabin a good suit of clothes, some clean linen, and a warm
overcoat.

The steward obeyed me humbly and officiously. He considered his life
still in great danger, and that he must fall a sacrifice to the fury
of the crew if he quitted the cuddy. However, I found him very useful,
for he furnished me with some very good hints, and, among other things,
he, to my great delight, informed me that he had in the steerage a box
of woman's underclothing, which had been made by his wife's hand for
a sister living in Valparaiso, to whom he was taking out the box as a
gift, and that I was very welcome to the contents.

I requested him at once to descend with me and get the box out; but
this job took us over twenty minutes, for the box was right aft, and
we had to clear away upwards of five hundred bird-cages, and a mass of
light wooden packages of toys and dolls to come at it. We succeeded at
last in hauling it into the cuddy, and he fetched the key and raised
the lid; but burst into tears when he saw a letter from his wife,
addressed to his sister, lying on top of the linen.

I told him to put the letter in his pocket, and to be sure that his
sister would be liberally compensated, if all went well with us, for
this appropriation of her property.

"I am not thinking of the clothes, sir," whined the poor fellow, "but
of my wife and child, who I may never see again."

"Nonsense," I exclaimed; "try to understand that a man is never dead
until the breath is out of his body. You are as well off as I am, and
those poor people in the cabin there. What we have to do now is to
help each other, and put a bold face on our troubles. The worst hasn't
arrived yet, and it won't do to go mad with anticipating it. Wait till
it comes, and if there's a road out of it, I'll take it, trust me. Cock
this box under your arm, and take it to Miss Robertson."

I had now done everything that was possible, and to my perfect
satisfaction; for besides having furnished the old gentleman with a
complete change of clothes, I had supplied his daughter with what I
knew she would appreciate as a great luxury--a quantity of warm, dry
underclothing.

It may strike the reader as ludicrous to find me descending into such
trivialities, and perhaps I smiled myself when I thought over the
business that had kept me employed since six o'clock. But shipwreck is
a terrible leveller, and cold and hunger and misery know but little
dignity. How would it seem to Miss Robertson, the daughter of a man
obviously opulent, to find herself destitute of clothing, and accepting
with gratitude such rude articles of dress as one poor workwoman would
make for another of her condition? She, with the memory in her of
abundant wardrobes, of costly silks, and furs, and jewellery, of rich
attire, and the plentiful apparel of an heiress! But the sea pays but
little attention to such claims, and would as lief strip a monarch as a
poor sailor, and set him afloat naked to struggle awhile and drown.




CHAPTER II.


At seven bells, that is, half an hour before eight, I heard the
carpenter's voice shouting down the companion for the steward. I
instantly opened the cabin door to tell the man to go at once, as I
believed that Stevens merely called to give him orders about the men's
breakfast.

This proved to be the case, as I presently learnt on going on deck,
whither I repaired (although it was my watch below) in order to see
what the carpenter was about.

I found him lying upon one of the skylights, with a signal-flag under
his head, smoking a pipe, whilst three or four of the men sat round
him smoking also. All plain sail had been made, as I had directed, and
the ship heading west-south-west under a glorious sky, and all around a
brilliantly clear horizon and an azure sea.

Away on our lee quarter was a large steamer steering south,
brig-rigged, bound, I took it, to the west coast of Africa. The men
about the carpenter made a movement when they saw me, as though they
would leave the poop, but one of them made some remark in a low voice,
which kept them all still. The carpenter, seeing me watching the
steamer, called out--

"She wouldn't take long to catch us, would she? I hope there's no man
on board this wessel as 'ud like to see her alongside, or would do
anything to bring her near. I wouldn't like to be the man as 'ud do
it--would you, Joe?"

"Well, I'd rather ha' made my vill fust than forgot it, if so it were
that I was that man," responded the fellow questioned.

"We're glad you've come up," continued the carpenter, addressing me,
though without shifting his posture, "for blowed if I know what to do
if she _should_ get askin' us any questions. What 'll _you_ do, Mr.
Royle?"

"Let her signal us first," I replied, quite alive to the sinister
suggestiveness of these questions.

"Put the helm up and go astern of her--that's what my advice is," said
one of the men.

"You'll provoke suspicion if you do that," I exclaimed. "However, you
can act as you please."

"Mr. Royle's quite right," said the man addressed as Joe. "Why can't
you leave him alone? He knows more about it than us, mates."

"She's going twelve knots," I said, "and will cross our bows soon
enough. Let her signal, we're not bound to answer."

The men, in spite of themselves, watched her anxiously, and so did
others on the forecastle, such cowards does conscience make of men.
As for myself, I gazed at her with bitter indifference. The help that
I stood in need of was not likely to come from such as she, or indeed
from any vessel short of an inquisitive Government ship. Moreover, the
part I was playing was too difficult to permit me to allow any impulse
to inspire. The smallest distrust that I should occasion might cost me
my life. My _rôle_ then surely was to seem one with the men, heart and
soul.

"Let her go off a point," I exclaimed to the man steering. "They'll not
notice that, and she'll be across us the sooner for it."

We were slipping through the water quickly, and by the time she was on
our weather bow the steamer was near enough to enable us to see the
awning stretched over her after-deck, and a crowd of persons watching
us. She was a great ocean steamer, and went magnificently through the
water. In a few minutes she was dead on end, dwindling the people
watching us, but leaving such a long wake astern of her that we went
over it.

What would I have given to be on board of her!

"Let her come to again!" I sang out.

The carpenter now got off the skylight.

"I've told the steward to turn to and get the men's breakfast,"
said he. "Ourn's to be ready by eight; and I reckon I'll show that
snivelling cockney what it is to be hungry. You don't call this a
mutiny, do yer, Mr. Royle? Why, the men are like lambs."

"Yes, so they are," I answered. "All the same, I shall be glad to feel
dry land under me. The law always hangs the skipper of a mutiny, you
know; and I'm skipper by your appointment. So the sooner we all get out
of this mess the better, eh, Mr. Stevens?"

"That's right enough," said he; "and we look to you to get us out of
it."

"I'll do what you ask me--I won't do more," I answered.

"We don't want more. Enough's what we want. You'll let us see your
reckonings every day--not because we doubt you--but it'll ease the
minds of the men to know that we aren't like to foul the Bermudas."

"The Bermudas are well to the nor'rard of our course," I answered
promptly.

"All right, Mr. Royle, we look to you," he said, with a face on him and
in a tone that meant a good deal more than met the ear. "Now, mates,"
addressing the others, "cut for'ard and get your breakfasts, my lads.
It's eight bells. Mr. Royle, I'll go below and call the boatswain; and
shall him and me have our breakfast and you arterwards, or you fust?
Say the word. I'm agreeable vichever way it goes."

"I'll stop on deck till you've done," I replied, wishing to have the
table to myself.

Down he went, and I advanced to the poop-rail and leaned over it to
watch the men come aft to receive their share of the cuddy stores.

I will do them the justice to say they were quiet enough. Whether the
perception that they no longer recognized any superiors would not
presently prevail; whether quarrels, deeds of violence, and all the
consequences which generally attend the rebellion of ignorant men
would not follow, was another matter. They were decent enough in their
behaviour now; congregating on the main-deck and entering the cuddy
one by one to receive the stores which the steward was serving out.

These stores, so far as I could judge by the contents of the tin dishes
which the men took forward, consisted of butter, white biscuit, a
rasher of ham to each man, and tea or cocoa; excellent fare for men
who had been starved on rotten provisions. I also found that every man
had been served with a glass of rum. They did not seem to begrudge
the privilege assumed by the carpenter and boatswain of occupying the
cuddy and eating at the table there. The impression conveyed to me on
the whole by their aspect and demeanour was that of men subdued and
to a certain extent alarmed by the position in which they had placed
themselves. But for the carpenter, I believe that I at that time and
working upon their then state of mind, could have won them over to
submission and made them willing to bring the ship into port and face
an inquiry into the circumstances of the revolt. But though I believe
this _now_, I conceived the attempt too full of peril to undertake,
seeing that my failure must not only jeopardize my own, but the lives
of poor old Mr. Robertson and his daughter, in the safety of whom I
was so concerned, that I do not say that my profound anxiety did not
paralyse the energy with which I should have attempted my own rescue
had I been alone.

How the men treated the steward I could not tell; but I noticed that
Master Cook was very quiet in his manner. This was a sure sign of the
efficacy of the fright he had received, and it pleased me greatly, as I
had feared he would prove a dangerous and bloodthirsty mutineer and a
terrible influence in the councils of the men.

The carpenter was the first to come on deck. I had seen him (through
the skylight) eating like a cormorant, his arms squared, his brown
tattooed hand busy with his mouth, making atonement for his long fast
in the forecastle. He kept his cap on, but the boatswain had better
manners, and looked, as he faced his mate, a quite superior and
different order of man altogether.

I went below as soon as Stevens appeared, and the boatswain had the
grace to rise, as though he would leave the table, when he saw me. I
begged him to keep his seat, and, calling to the steward, asked to know
how the men had treated him.

"Pretty middling, sir, thank you, sir," he replied, with a trifle more
spirit in his manner. "They're not brutal, sir. The cook never spoke,
sir. Mr. Stevens is rather unkind, but I daresay it's only a way he
has."

The boatswain laughed, and asked him if he had breakfasted.

"No, sir--not yet. I can wait, sir."

"There's plenty to eat and drink," said the boatswain, pointing to the
table.

"Yes, sir, plenty," responded the steward, who, looking on the
boatswain as one of the ringleaders, was as much afraid of him as of
the carpenter.

"Well, then," continued the boatswain, "why don't you tuck in? Mr.
Royle won't mind. Sit there, or take what you want into the pantry."

The steward turned pale, remembering the threats that had been used
towards him if he touched the cuddy stores, and looked upon the
boatswain's civility as a trick to get him hanged.

"Thank you, sir," he stammered; "I've no happetite. I'd rather not eat
anything at present, sir. I'll take a ship's biscuit shortly, sir, with
your leave."

Saying which, and with a ghastly face, he shuffled into the pantry, no
doubt to escape from what he would consider highly murderous attentions.

"Rum customer, that steward, Mr. Royle," said the boatswain, rubbing
his mouth on the back of his hand.

"So should I be had I undergone his sensations," I replied.

"Well, I don't know about that. You see there ain't nothing regular
about a steward. He isn't a sailor and he isn't a landsman; and when
you come to them kind o' mongrels, you can't expect much sperrit. It
isn't fair to expect it. It's like fallin' foul of a marmozeet, because
he isn't as big as a monkey. What about them passengers o' yours, sir?
They've not been sarved with breakfast since I've been here?"

"I have seen to them," I answered. "What has Stevens been talking
about?" As I said this I cast my eyes on the open skylight to see that
our friend was not within hearing.

He shook his head, and after a short pause exclaimed--

"He's a bad 'un! he's a bad 'un! he's an out-and-outer!"

"Do you know which of them struck the captain down?"

"He did," he answered at once.

"I could have sworn it by the way in which he excused the murderer."

"Stevens," continued the boatswain, "is at the bottom of all this
here business--him and the cook. I suppose he didn't want the cook
for a chum, and so knocked him over when he was going to operate
on Duckling's body. But Duckling was a bad 'un too, and so was the
skipper. They've got to thank theirselves for what they got. The crew
never would ha' turned had they been properly fed."

"I believe that," I said. "But I'll tell you what's troubling me,
boatswain. The carpenter has some design behind all this, which he is
concealing. Does he really mean that I should navigate the ship to
within fifty miles of New Orleans?"

"Yes, sir, he do," answered the boatswain, regarding me stedfastly.

"And he means then to heave the ship to, lower away the boats, and make
for one of the mouths of the Mississippi, or land upon some part of the
coast, and represent himself and his companions as castaway sailors?"

"Quite right," said the boatswain, watching me fixedly.

"If that is really his intention," I proceeded, "I cannot believe that
he will allow me to land with the others. He distrusts me. He is as
suspicious as all murderers are."

The boatswain continued eyeing me intently, as a man might who strives
to form a resolution from the expression in another's face.

"He means to scuttle the ship," he said, in a low voice.

"Ah!" I exclaimed, starting. "I should have foreseen this."

"He means to scuttle her just before he puts off in the boats," he
added in a whisper.

I watched him anxiously, for I saw that he had more to tell me. He
looked up at both skylights, then towards the cuddy door, then towards
the companion ladder, bent over to me, and said--

"Mr. Royle, he don't mean to let you leave this vessel."

"He means to scuttle her, leaving me on board?"

He nodded.

"Did he tell you this?"

He nodded again.

"When?"

"Just now."

"And them?" I exclaimed, pointing towards the cabin in which were Mr.
Robertson and his daughter.

"They'll be left too," he replied.

I took a deep breath, and closed the knife and fork on my plate.

"Now then, mate!" bawled the carpenter's voice, down the companion;
"how long are you goin' to be?"

"Coming," answered the boatswain.

A thought had flashed upon me.

"There must be others in this ship whom Stevens distrusts as well
as me," I whispered. "Who are they? Give me but two other men and
yourself, and I'll engage that the ship will be ours! See! if these
men whom he distrusts could be told that, at the last moment, they will
be left to sink in a scuttled ship, they would come over on my side to
save their lives. How are they to be got at?"

He shook his head without speaking, and left the table; but turned to
say, "Don't be in a hurry. I've got two hours afore me, and I'll turn
it over." He then went on deck.

I remained at the cuddy table, buried in thought. The boatswain's
communication had utterly taken me by surprise. That Stevens, after
the promise he had made me that there should be no more bloodshed,
after the sympathy I had shown the men from the beginning, should be
base enough to determine upon murdering me and the inoffensive persons
we had rescued, at the moment when we might think our escape from our
heavy misfortunes certain, was so shocking that the thought of it made
me feel as one stunned. An emotion of deep despair was bred in me, and
then this, in its turn, begot a wild fit of fury. I could scarcely
restrain myself from rushing on deck and shooting the ruffian as he
stood there.

To escape from my own insanity, I ran into the captain's cabin, and
locked the door, and plunged into deep and bitter reflection.

It was idle for me to think of resistance in my then condition. Upon
whom could I count? The boatswain? I could not be sure that he would
aid me single-handed, nor hope that he would try to save my life at the
risk of his own. The steward? Such a feeble-hearted creature would only
hamper me, would be of less use even than old Mr. Robertson. Many among
the crew, if not all of them indeed, must obviously be acquainted with
Stevens' murderous intentions, and would make a strong and desperate
gang to oppose me; and though I should discover the men who were not
in the carpenter's confidence, how could I depend on them at the last
moment?

The feeling of helplessness induced in me by these considerations was
profound and annihilating. I witnessed the whole murderous process as
though it were happening: the ship hove to, the boats shoving away,
one, perhaps, remaining to watch the vessel sink, that they might be in
no doubt of our having perished. All this would happen in the dark too,
for the departure of the men from the ship would only be safe at night,
that no passing vessel might espy them.

An idea that will sound barbarous, though I should not have hesitated
to carry it out could I have seen my way to it, occurred to me. This
was to watch an opportunity when the carpenter was alone, to hurl him
overboard. But here, again, the chances against me were fifty to one.
To destroy the villain without risk of detection, without the act being
witnessed, without suspicion attaching to me on his being missed, would
imply such a host of favouring conditions as the kindliest fortune
could scarcely assemble together.

What then was to be done?

I had already pointed out the course the ship was to steer, and could
not alter it. But though I should plausibly alter her course a point
or two, what could follow? The moment land was sighted, let it be what
coast it would, they would know I had deceived them; or, giving me the
credit of having mistaken my reckonings, they would heave the ship
to themselves, and then would come the dastardly crime. I dared not
signal any passing vessel. Let my imagination devise what it would,
it could invent nothing that my judgment would adopt; since, being
single-handed in this ship, no effort I could make to save the lives of
the persons it was my determination to stand by, but must end in our
destruction.

By such confessions I show myself no hero; but then I do not want
to be thought one. I was, and am, a plain man, placed in one of the
most formidable situations that any one could find himself in. In the
darkness and horror of that time I saw no means of escape, and so I
admit my blindness. A few strokes of the pen would easily show me other
than I was, but then I should not be telling the truth, and should
be falsely taking glory to myself, instead of truly showing it to be
God's, by whose mercy I am alive to tell the story.

My clothes and other things belonging to me being in the cabin now
occupied by Stevens, I opened the door and desired the steward to bring
them to me. My voice was heard by Miss Robertson, who came round the
table to where I stood, and thanked me for my kindness to her and her
father.

She had made good use of the few conveniences I had been able to send
her. Her hair was brushed, and most prettily looped over the comb, and
she wore a collar that became her mightily, which she had found in the
steward's box. She looked a sweet and true English girl; her deathlike
pallor gradually yielding to a healthy white with a tinge of colour on
the cheeks.

"Papa seems better," she said, "and is constantly asking for you; but I
told him," (with the prettiest smile,) "that you require rest as well
as others, and that you have plenty to occupy you."

Then looking earnestly at me for some moments, while her face grew
wonderfully grave, she exclaimed--

"What is wrong, Mr. Royle? What makes you look so anxious and worried?"

"There is plenty to trouble me," I answered, not carelessly, but not
putting too much significance into my tone, for at that moment I
did not think I ought to tell her the truth. "You know the men have
mutinied, and that my position is a difficult one. I have to be careful
how I act, both for my sake and yours."

"Yes, I know that," she said, keeping her clear and thoughtful eyes on
me. "But then you said you did not fear that the men would be violent
again, and that they would leave us on board this ship when we were
near New Orleans."

I watched her face some time without speaking, asking myself if
I should take her into my confidence, if I ought to impart the
diabolical scheme of Stevens, as told me by the boatswain. Certainly
I should have put her off without telling her the truth had not the
courageous expression in her eyes, her firm and beautiful mouth, her
resolute voice and manner, told me she would know how to bear it.

"I will not conceal that I have heard something just now which has
affected me very much," I said to her. "Will you step into my cabin? We
can talk there without being seen," I added, having observed Stevens
walk along the main-deck, and expecting that he would return in a few
moments to his cabin, it being his watch below.

She followed me in silence, and I closed the door.

"I will tell you in a few words," I at once began, "what I heard just
now. I told the boatswain that I questioned whether the men would let
me land with them for fear of the evidence I could give. He replied
that he had gathered from the carpenter, while at breakfast, that the
men intended to scuttle the ship when they quitted her, and to leave us
on board."

"To drown?"

"That is their idea."

She pursed up her mouth tightly, and pressed her hand to her forehead.
That was all. Whatever emotion my statement inspired was hidden. She
said in a low voice--

"They are fiends! I did not think them so cruel--my poor father!"

"This is what I am told they mean to do; and I know Stevens to be a
ruffian, and that he will carry out his project if he can. I have spent
some time alone here, in trying to think how we can save ourselves; as
yet I see no remedy. But wait," I said; "it will take us three weeks,
sailing well every day, to reach the Gulf of Mexico. I have this time
before me; and in that time not only something must, but something
shall be done."

She did not answer.

"I will hazard nothing. I will venture no risks; what I resolve to do
must be effectual," I went on, "because my life is dearer to me now
than it was three days ago, for your and your father's sake. You must
be saved from these ruffians, but no risk must attend your deliverance.
That is why I see no escape before us as _yet_; but it will come--it
will come! Despair is very fruitful in expedients, and I am not beaten
because I find myself flung like a dog in a hole!"

She looked up at this, and said, "What is to be done?"

"I must think."

"I will think, too. We need not tell papa?" she added, toning her voice
to a question, with an appealing look in her eyes.

"No, certainly not. Remember, we are not supposed to question the men's
honest intentions towards us. We must appear utterly ignorant."

"Are they armed?" she inquired.

"No."

She cast her eyes round the cabin and said, "Have you no guns?"

"Nothing but a pistol. But though we had twenty guns we have no hands
to use them. So far as I know as yet, there is no man who would stand
with me--not even the boatswain, unless he were sure we should conquer
the ruffians."

"Could I not use a pistol? Ah, I remember, you have only one."

She sank her chin on her hand and looked downwards, lost in thought.

"Why would you not steer the ship for some near port?" she asked
presently.

"I could not alter the course without being challenged. Remember that
my policy is not to excite suspicion of my honesty."

"If a gale would rise like that which wrecked the _Cecilia_, it might
drive us near the land, where we could get help."

"No, we shall have to depend upon ourselves. I do not want to pin my
faith on chance."

I began to pace to and fro, torn by the blind and useless labours of my
mind.

Just then a step sounded along the cuddy. The cabin door was pushed
open roughly, and Stevens walked in. He stared at Miss Robertson, and
cried--

"Sorry to interrupt. Didn't know you was here, mam, I'm sure. I
thought," addressing me, "I should find you turned in. I've come to
have a look at that chart o' yours. How long d'ye make it to New
Orleans?"

"About three weeks."

"Well, there's live stock enough for three weeks, any ways. I've just
told the cook to stick one of them porkers. All hands has a fancy for
roast pork to-day. Sarvant, miss. You was pretty nigh drownded, I
think."

"My father and I owe our lives to the noble fellows in this ship. They
must be brave and good men to risk their lives to save ours," she
answered, with a smile of touching sweetness, looking frankly into the
face of the miscreant who stood, cap on head, before her.

"Lor' bless yer!" he exclaimed; "there wasn't no risk. I'd ha' swum the
distance in such a sea for five shilling."

She shook her head with another smile (I judged the effort this piece
of acting cost her), as she said--

"I know that English sailors always undervalue their good deeds. But
happily my father is a rich man, and when you land us he will take care
that no man on board this ship shall complain of his gratitude."

"Oh, he's rich!" exclaimed the carpenter, as though struck with a new
idea.

"Very rich."

"How rich might he be, mam?"

"Well, he owned the ship that you saved us from--cargo and ship."

She could not have offered a better illustration of her father's wealth
to the man, for he would appreciate the value of a vessel of that size.

"And what do you think he'll give the men--them as saved him, I
suppose?"

"Oh, he won't make any difference. He is indebted to you all, for I
have heard that the captain would not have stopped for us had he not
been obliged to do so by the crew."

"That's true enough," rejoined the carpenter with an oath, looking at
me.

"Perfectly true," I made haste to say.

"My father would not certainly offer less than one hundred pounds to
each man," she said quite simply.

He pulled off his cap at this and twirled it and let it drop; picked it
up so slowly that I thought he would never bend his body sufficiently
to enable him to recover it; looked at her sideways as he put it on his
head again, and then said to me with offensive abruptness--

"Come, master, let's have a look at that blooming chart."

I opened the door to let Miss Robertson pass out, exchanging one glance
with her as she left, and addressed myself to the carpenter.

He pored over the chart with his dirty forefinger upon it.

"Whereabouts are we now?" he inquired.

I pointed to the spot as near as I could judge from yesterday's
reckonings.

"What's this here line?" he asked.

"That's the longitude."

He ran his eye to the bottom of the chart and exclaimed--

"Thirty. Is that it?"

"Call it thirty."

"But what do _you_ call it?"

"Thirty, I tell you--thirty degrees west longitude."

"And this here line's the latitude, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"That's forty."

"Call it forty-four."

"Will that make it right?"

"Pretty nearly."

"What are all these here dots and streaks?" said he, after squinting
with his nose close to the chart. "Blowed if ever I could read them
small words."

"They are the Azores."

"Oh, we're to the norrards o' them, aren't we?" he inquired sharply.

"You can see for yourself," I answered, putting my finger on the chart.

"Where's this blessed Gulf of Mexico?" he inquired, after casting his
eyes all over the chart.

"There."

He ran his dirty thumbnail in a line to the the Gulf, and asked me what
that blot was.

"Bermuda."

"You'll keep south o' that, will yer?"

"If I can, certainly."

"It's a man-o'-war station, I've heerd."

"I believe it is."

"All right," he said, and looking at the boat's compass on the table,
asked if it were true.

I told him it was; whereupon he set it on the chart and compared its
indications with the line he had run down the chart, and was going
away, when I said--

"What do you think of the young lady's idea? I should like to earn a
hundred pounds."

"So should I," he answered gruffly, pausing.

"It would pretty well pay me for what I have had to put up with from
Coxon."

He gave me an indescribable look, full of fierceness, suspicion, and
cunning.

"I dessay it would, if you got it," he said, and walked out, banging
the door after him.




CHAPTER III.


I had been greatly struck by the firmness with which Miss Robertson
had received the ghastly bit of information I gave her, and not more
by this than by her gentle and genial manner towards the carpenter,
wherein she had shown herself perfectly well qualified to act with me
in this critical, dangerous time. She had only just been rescued from
one trial frightful enough in character to have driven one, at least,
of the male sufferers mad; and now fate had plunged her into a worse
situation, and yet she could confront the terrors of it calmly, and
deliberate collectedly upon the danger.

Such a character as this was, I thought, of the true type of heroine,
with nothing in it that was strained; calm in emergency, and with a
fruitful mind scattering hope around it--even though no more than
hope--as the teeming flower sheds its perfume. I had especially noticed
the quickness with which she had conceived and expressed that idea
about her father rewarding the men; it inspirited me, in spite of the
reception Stevens had given it. One hundred pounds a man was a promise
that might move them into a very different train of thought from what
Stevens had induced and was sustaining.

Having heard the carpenter enter his cabin, I determined to step on
deck and take the boatswain's sense on this new idea. But before
quitting the cuddy, I knocked lightly on Miss Robertson's cabin door.

She opened it instantly.

"Will you come on deck?" I asked her.

"Yes, if I can be of use there."

"The air will refresh you after your confinement to this cabin, and
will do your father good."

"He is sleeping now," she answered, opening the door fully, that I
might see the old man.

"Let him sleep," said I; "that will do him more good. But you will
come?"

"Yes, with pleasure."

"You have nothing to fear from the men," I said, wishing to reassure
her. "They are willing to acknowledge the authority of the persons they
have put over them--the bo'sun, Stevens, and myself."

"I should not mind if they spoke to me," she exclaimed. "I should know
what to say to them, unless they were brutal."

She suddenly added, putting her hand to her head, and almost laughing--

"I have no hat."

"I have a straw hat you shall have," I said, and brought it.

She put it on her head, and it sat very well on the pile of yellow hair
that lay heaped over her comb.

"How strange," she said, speaking in the whisper in which our
conversation had been carried on, "to find oneself destitute,--without
even the commonest necessaries! When the captain of the _Cecilia_ said
we were sinking, papa ran with me out of the cabin. We did not think of
putting on our hats, nor of saving anything but our lives."

She turned to look at her father, closed the door tenderly, and
accompanied me on deck.

The morning was now advanced. The day was still very bright; and
the wonderful blue of the heavens lost nothing of its richness from
contrast with the stately and swelling clouds--pearl-coloured where
they faced the sun, and with here and there a rainbow on their skirts,
and centres of creamy white--which sailed solemnly over it.

The breeze had freshened, but the swell had greatly subsided, and the
sea was almost smooth, with brilliant little waves chasing it. The ship
was stretching finely along the water, all sail set and every sail
drawing.

On our lee beam was the canvas of a big ship, her hull invisible; and
astern of her I could just make out the faint tracing of the smoke of a
steamer upon the sky. The sun shone warm, but not too warm; the strong
breeze was sweet and soft; the ship's motion steady, and her aspect a
glorious picture of white and rounded canvas, taut rigging delicately
interlaced, and gleaming decks and glittering brass-work. The blue
water sang a racing chorus at the bows, and the echo died upon the
broad and bubbling wake astern.

I ran my eye forwards upon the men on the forecastle. Most of the crew
were congregated there, lounging, squatting, smoking--no man doing any
work. I wondered, not at this, but that they should be so orderly and
keep their place. They might have come aft had they pleased, swarmed
into the cuddy, occupied the cabins; for the ship was theirs. Since
they acted with so much decency, could they not be won over from their
leader's atrocious project? If I went among them, holding this girl,
now at my side, by the hand, and pleaded for her life, if not for my
own, would they not spare her? would not some among them be moved by
her beauty and her helplessness?

Nothing should seem more rational than such conjectures, always
providing that I ceased to remember these men were criminals, that
their one idea now was to elude the law, and that I who should plead,
and those for whom I pleaded, could by a word, when set on shore,
procure the conviction of the whole gang, charge them with their
crimes, prove their identity, and secure their punishment. Would not
Stevens keep them in mind of this? Knowing what they knew, knowing what
they meditated, I say that in the very orderliness of their behaviour,
I witnessed something more sinister than I should have found in violent
conduct. I alone could carry them to where they wished to go. I must be
conciliated, pleased, obeyed, and my fears tranquillized. If I failed
them, their doom was inevitable; shipwreck or capture was certain. All
this was plain to me as the fingers on my hand; and during the brief
time I stood watching them, I found myself repeating again and again
the hopeless question, "What can I do?"

Miss Robertson seated herself on one of the skylights, that nearest the
break of the poop. The boatswain glanced at her respectfully, and the
men forward stared, and some of them laughed, but none of the remarks
they indulged in were audible.

Fish was at the wheel. I went to the binnacle, and said--

"That's our course. Let this wind hold, and we'll soon be clear of this
mess."

"Three weeks about, I gives us," answered the man.

"And long enough, too," said I.

He spat the quid in his mouth overboard, and dried his lips on his
cuff. As he did not seem disposed to talk, I left him and joined the
boatswain, and at my request he came and stood with me near Miss
Robertson.

"I have told this lady what you repeated to me at breakfast," I said,
in a low voice. "She is full of courage, and I have asked her to come
on deck that we may talk before her."

"If she's as brave as she's pretty, I reckon not many 'll carry stouter
hearts in 'em than her," he said, addressing her full, with an air of
respectful gallantry that was very taking.

She looked down with a smile.

"Boatswain," said I, "every hour is precious to us, for at any moment
Stevens may change the ship's course for a closer shore than the
American; and though we should hold on for the Gulf, it may take us all
our time to hit on a scheme to save ourselves and work it out. I have
come to tell you an idea suggested by this lady, Miss Robertson. Her
father is a rich man, owner of the vessel he was wrecked in----"

"Robertson and Co., of Liverpool, ship-brokers?" he interrupted,
addressing her.

"Yes," she replied.

"Why, I sailed in one o' that firm's wessels as bo'sun's mate, three
year ago, the _Albany_ she was called, and a werry comfortable ship she
was, well found and properly commanded."

"Indeed!" she exclaimed, brightening up and looking at him eagerly.
And then, reflecting a little, she said--"The _Albany_--that ship was
commanded by Captain Tribett."

"Quite right, miss, Tribett was the name. And the first mate's name
was Green, and the second's Gull, and the third--ah! he were Captain
Tribett's son,--same name of course. Well, blow me if this ain't wot
the Italians calls a cohincidence."

He was as pleased as she, and stood grinning on her.

"Mr. Royle," she exclaimed, raising her fine eyes to mine, "surely
there must be others like the boatswain in this ship. They cannot all
be after the pattern of that horrible carpenter!"

"We ought to be able to find that out, bos'un," I said.

"Look here, miss," he answered, with a glance first at the men forward
and then at Fish at the wheel, "the circumstances of this here affair
is just this: the crew have been very badly treated, fed with rotten
stores, and starved and abused by the skipper and chief mate until they
went mad. I don't think myself that they meant to kill the captain and
Mr. Duckling; but it happened, and no man barrin' Stevens was guiltier
than his mate, and that's where it is. The carpenter knocked the
skipper down, and others kicked him when he was down, not knowing he
was dead; and four or five set on Mr. Duckling, and so you see it's
a sin as they all share alike in. If one man had killed the skipper,
and another man had killed the chief mate, why then so be, miss, the
others might be got to turn upon 'em to save their own necks. But here
it's all hands as did the job. And the only man who kept away, though
I pretended to be one with 'em hearty enough, was me; and wot's the
consequince. Stevens don't trust me; and I'm sartin in my own mind that
he don't mean to let me into the boats when the time comes, any more
than you."

So saying, he deliberately walked aft, looked at the compass, then at
the sails, and patrolled the poop for several minutes, for the very
obvious reason that the men should not take notice of our talking long
and close together.

Presently he rejoined us, standing a little distance away, and in a
careless attitude.

"Bo'sun," said I, addressing him with my eyes on the deck, so that from
a distance I would not appear to be speaking, "Miss Robertson told
Stevens that her father would handsomely reward every man on board this
ship on her arrival in port. He asked her what her father would give,
and she said a hundred pounds to each man. If this were repeated to the
crew, what effect would it produce?"

"They wouldn't believe it."

"My father would give each man a promise in writing," she exclaimed.

"They wouldn't trust him," said the boatswain, without reflecting.
"They'd think it a roose to bring 'em together to give 'em into
custody. If I was one of them that's what I should think, and you may
be sure I'm right."

"But he would give them written orders on his bankers; they could not
think it a ruse," she said eagerly, evidently enamoured of her own
idea, since she saw that I entertained it.

"Sailors don't no nothing about banks and the likes of that, miss.
There are thirteen men in the ship's company, counting the cook and
the steward. Call 'em twelve. If your father had a bag of sovereigns
on board this wessel, and counted out a hundred to each man, then
they'd believe him. But I'd not believe _them_. They'd take the money
and scuttle the ship all the same. Don't make no mistake. They're fond
o' their wagabone lives, and the carpenter's given 'em such a talkin'
to, that they're precious keen on gettin' away and cuttin' off all
evidence. It 'ud take more than a hundred pound each man to make 'em
willing to risk their lives."

He walked away once more and stood lounging aft, chatting with Fish.

"I am afraid the bo'sun is right," said I. "Having lived among them and
heard their conversation, he would know their characters too well to be
deceived in the consequences of your scheme."

"But papa would pay them, Mr. Royle. He would give them any pledge they
might choose to name, that they would run no risk. The money could be
sent to them--they need not appear--they need not be seen."

"We know they would run no risks; but could we get them to believe us?"

"At least let us try."

"No--forgive me--we must not try. We must have nothing more to say. You
have spoken to Stevens; let _him_ talk among the men. If the reward
tempt them, be sure they will concert measures among themselves to land
you. But I beg you to have no faith in this project. They are villains,
who will betray you in the end. The boatswain's arguments respecting
them are perfectly just--so just that he has inspired me with a new
kind of faith in him. He owns that his own life is in jeopardy, and I
believe he will hit upon some expedient to save us. See how he watches
us! He will join us presently. I, too, have a scheme dawning in my
head, but too imperfect to discuss as yet. Courage!" I said, animated
by her beauty and the deep, speaking expression of her blue eyes: "the
bo'sun's confession of his own danger makes me feel stronger by a man.
I have greater confidence in him than I had. If I could but muster a
few firearms--for even the steward might be made a man of, fighting
for his life with a revolver in his hand--there is nothing I would not
dare. But twelve to two!--what is our chance? It must not be thought
of, with you and your father depending for your lives on ours."

"No," she answered firmly. "There must be other and better ways. I will
think as well as you."

The boatswain came sauntering towards us. He flung a coil of rope over
a belaying-pin, looked over the ship's side, approached us nearer, and
pulled out a pipe and asked me for a light. I had one in my pocket and
gave it to him. This was his excuse to speak.

"It isn't so suspicious lookin' to talk now as it would be at night
or in the cuddy--and in the cuddy there's no telling whose ears are
about," he said. "I'll give you my scheme, thought on since breakfast,
and listen close, for I durstn't talk much; after this we must belay,
or the men 'll be set jawing. When we come to the Gulf of Mexico,
you'll let me know how long it'll be afore we're fifty mile off the
Mississippi. I helped to stow the cargo in this vessel, and she's
choke full, and there's only one place as they'll be able to get at to
scuttle her, and that's right forrards of the fore hatch. I'll let that
out to Stevens bit by bit, in an ordinary way, and he'll remember it.
The night afore we heave to--you'll tell me when--I'll fall overboard
and get drowned. That'll happen in your watch. We'll get one o' them
packin' cases full o' tin-tack up out o' the steerage and stow it away
in one of the quarter-boats, and you'll let that drop overboard, d'ye
see? which 'll sound like a man's body, and sink right away, and then
you'll roar out that the boatswain's fallen overboard. Let 'em do
what they like. I shall be stowed away forrard, down in the forepeak
somewheers, and the man as comes there to bore a hole, _I'll choke_.
Leave the rest to me. If Stevens he sings out to know if it's done,
I'll say 'Yes,' and tell him to lower away the boats, and hold on for
me. He'll take my voice for the fellow as is scuttling the ship. Now,"
he added vehemently, "I'll lay any man fifty pound agin ten shillings,
that Stevens don't wait for the man he sends below. He'll get into the
boat and shove off and lay by. You'll give me the signal, and I'll
come up sharp, an' if there's a breath o' air we'll have the mainyards
round somehow; and if the boats get in our road we'll run 'em down; and
if there's no wind, and they try to board us--let 'em look out! for
there'll be more blood-letting among 'em than ever they saw before, by
God!"

He motioned with his hand that we should leave the poop, and walked
away.

Miss Robertson looked at me and I at her for some moments in silence.

"Will it do, Mr. Royle?" she asked, in a low voice.

"Yes," I said.

"You think we shall be saved by this stratagem?"

I reflected before answering, and then said, "I do."

She went down the companion-ladder, and when we were in the cuddy, she
took my hand in both of hers, and pressed it tightly to her heart, then
hurried into her cabin.




CHAPTER IV.


The more I considered the boatswain's proposal, the better I liked
it. All that day I turned it over and over in my mind. And, what was
useful to me, I could sleep when I lay down in my watches below, which
was a luxury I had feared, after the boatswain's disclosure at the
breakfast-table, would be denied me.

I did not wish Miss Robertson to sit at the cuddy table at meal hours,
and when dinner-time came I took care that as good a meal should be
taken to her and her father as the ship could furnish.

When Stevens joined me at the table, he sang out to the steward to
"tell the old gent an' his darter that dinner vos a vaitin'!" Whereupon
I explained that the old gentleman was too ill to leave his bunk.

"Well, then, let the gal come," said he.

"She can't leave her father," I replied.

"Perhaps it ain't that so much as because I ain't genteel enough for
her. It's the vest end o' London as won't have nothen to do with
Wapping. The tobaccy in my breath's too strong for her."

"Nothing of the kind. The old man is ill, and she must watch him. As to
your manners, I dare say she is better pleased with them than you ought
to be told. It is not every ship's carpenter that could talk and look
like a skipper, and keep men under as you do."

"You're right there!" he exclaimed, with a broad grin. "Come, sarve us
out a dollop o' that pork, will yer? Roast pork's never too fresh for
me."

And he fell like an animal to the meat, and forgot, as I wished, all
about Miss Robertson.

In the first watch, from eight in the evening until midnight, which was
the boatswain's, I went and sat for an hour with the old gentleman and
his daughter. Not a word was said about the peril we were in; he was
quite ignorant of it, and, being better and stronger, was eager in his
questions about the ship's progress.

I took notice that he appeared to forget all about the mutiny, and
conversed as if I were captain. Nor did he show any strong recollection
of the loss of his ship and the circumstances attending it. Indeed,
it seemed that as he grew better his memory grew worse. _That_ was
the faculty injured by his sufferings, and when I listened to his
questions, which took no cognizance of things of the past, though
as recent as yesterday, I thought his memory would presently quit
him wholly, for he was an old man, with a mind too feeble to hold on
tightly.

I left them at half-past nine, and went on deck. I tried to see who was
at the wheel, but could not make the man out. I think it was one of the
Dutchmen. Better this man than Fish, Johnson, or some of the others,
whose names I forget, who were thick with the carpenter, and before
whom it would not be wise to talk with any suggestion of mystery with
the boatswain.

However, there was not much chance of my being noticed, for the night
was gloomy, and all about the decks quite dark. The ship was under
topsails and main top-gallant sail; the wind was east-south-east,
blowing freshly, with long seas. There was no appearance of foul
weather, and the glass stood steady; but an under-sky of level cloud
lay stretched across the stars; and looking abroad over the ship's
side, nothing was distinguishable but the foam of the waves breaking as
they ran.

As I emerged from the companion, the boatswain hailed the forecastle,
and told the man there to keep a good look-out. I had not had an
opportunity of speaking to him since the morning. I touched him on the
arm, and he turned and stared to see who I was.

"Ah, Mr. Royle," said he.

"Let's get under the lee of that quarter-boat," said I. "We can hear
each other there. Who's at the wheel?"

"Dutch Joe."

"Come to the binnacle first, and I'll talk to you about the ship's
course, and then we'll get under the quarter-boat, and he'll think I am
giving you sailing directions."

We did this, and I gave the boatswain some instructions in the hearing
of the Dutchman; and to appear very much in earnest, the boatswain and
I hove the log whilst Dutch Joe turned the glass, which he could easily
attend to, holding a spoke with one hand, for the ship was steering
herself.

We then walked to the quarter-boat and stood under the lee of it.

"Bo'sun," said I, "the more I think of your scheme, the better I like
it. Whatever may happen, your being in the hold will prevent any man
from scuttling the ship."

"Yes, so it will; I'll take care of that. One blow must do the job--he
mustn't cry out. The pianofortes are amidships on nearly two foot of
dunnage; all forrard the cases run large, and it's there they'll find
space."

"My intention is not to wait until we come to the Gulf in order to
carry this out," said I; "I'll clap on sixty, eighty, a hundred miles,
just as I see my way, to every day's run, so as to bring the Gulf of
Mexico close alongside the Bermuda Islands. Do you understand, bo'sun?"

"Yes, I understand. There's no use in waitin'. You're quite right to
get it over. The sooner the better, says I."

"We shall average a run of 300 miles every twenty-four hours, and I'll
slip in an extra degree whenever I can. Who's to know?"

"Ne'er a man on this wessel, sir," he answered. "There's not above two
as can spell words in a book."

"So I should think. Of course I shall have to prick off the chart
according to the wind. A breeze like this may well give us three
hundred miles. If it fall calm I can make her drift sixty miles
west-sou'-west, and clap on another eighty for steerage way. I shall
have double reckonings--one for the crew, one for myself. You, as chief
mate, will know it's all right."

"Leave that to me," he answered, with a short laugh. "They've found out
by this time that the ship's a clipper, and I'll let 'em understand
that there never was a better navigator than you. It 'll be for you and
me to keep as much canvas on her as she'll carry in our watches, for
the sake of appearance; and if I was you, sir, I'd trim the log-line
afresh."

"A good idea," said I. "I'll give her a double dose. Twelve knots shall
be nothing in a moderate breeze."

We both laughed at this; and then, to make my presence on deck appear
reasonable, I walked to the binnacle.

I returned and said--

"In nine days hence we must contrive to be in longitude 62° and
latitude 33°;--somewhere about it. If we can average 180 miles every
day we shall do it."

"What do you make the distance from where we are now to the Gulf?"

"In broad numbers, three thousand miles."

"No more?"

"Averaging two hundred miles a day we should be abreast of New Orleans
in a fortnight. I said three weeks, but I shall correct myself to
Stevens to-morrow, after I have taken observations. I'll show him a
jump on the chart that will astonish him. I'll punish the scoundrels
yet. I'll give them the direct course to Bermuda when they're in the
boats, and if our plot only succeeds and the wind serves, one of us two
will be ashore on the island before them, to let the governor know whom
he is to expect."

"That may be done, too," answered the boatswain; "but it'll have to be
a dark night to get away from 'em without their seeing of us."

"They'll choose a dark night for their own sakes. Boatswain, give us
your hand. Your cleverness has in my opinion as good as saved us. I
felt a dead man this morning, but I never was more alive, thanks to
you, than I am now."

I grasped his hand, and went below, positively in better spirits that I
had enjoyed since I first put my foot upon this ill-fated ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first thing I did next morning was to mark off the log-line
afresh, having smuggled the reel below during my watch. I shortened
the distances between the knots considerably, so that a greater number
should pass over the stern whilst the sand was running than would be
reeled off if the line were true.

At eight bells, when the boatswain went on deck, I asked him to
take the log with him; and following him presently, just as Stevens
was about to leave the poop, I looked around me, as if studying the
weather, and exclaimed--

"Bos'un, you must keep the log going, please. Heave it every hour,
never less. I may have to depend upon dead-reckoning to-day, Mr.
Stevens;" and I pointed to the sky, which was as thick as it had been
all night.

"Shall I heave it now?" inquired the boatswain.

"Did you heave it in your watch, Mr. Stevens?" said I.

"No," he replied. "What are we doin' now? This has been her pace all
along--ha'n't touched a brace or given an order since I came on deck."

He had come on deck to relieve me at four.

"Let's heave the log," I exclaimed; "I shall be better satisfied."

I gave the glass to Stevens, and whilst arranging the log-ship, I
looked over the side, and said--

"By Jove, she's walking and no mistake."

"I allow that we're doing ten," said the man at the wheel.

"I give her thirteen good," said I.

"Call it fifteen, and you'll not be far out," observed the boatswain.

The carpenter cocked his evil eye at the water, but hazarded no
conjecture.

"She _can_ sail--if she can't do nothen else," was all he said.

I flung the log-ship overboard.

"Turn!" I cried out.

I saw the knots fibbing out like a string of beads. The reel roared in
the boatswain's hands, and when Stevens called "Stop!" I caught the
line and allowed it to jam me against the rail, as though the weight of
it, dragged through the water at the phenomenal speed at which we were
supposed to be going, would haul me overboard.

"What's that knot there, Mr. Stevens?" I called out. "Bear a hand! the
line is cutting my fingers in halves!"

He put down the sand-glass and laid hold of the line where the knot
was, and began to count.

"Fifteen!" he roared.

"Well, I'm jiggered!" exclaimed the man steering.

I looked at Stevens triumphantly, as though I should say, "What do you
think of that?"

"I told you you wur wrong, Mr. Royle," said the boatswain. "It's all
fifteen. By jingo! it ain't sailing, it's engine drivin'!"

The true speed of the _Grosvenor_ was about nine and a half
knots--certainly not more; and whether the carpenter should believe the
report of the log or not, was nothing to me.

"Log it fifteen on the slate, bo'sun, and keep the log going every
hour," I said, and went below again.

I saw, as was now my regular custom at every meal, that the steward
took a good breakfast to the Robertsons' cabin, and then sat down with
Stevens to the morning repast.

I took this opportunity of suggesting that if the wind held, and the
vessel maintained her present rate of speed, we might hope to be in the
Gulf of Mexico in a fortnight.

"How do you make that out? It was three weeks yesterday."

"And it might have been a month," I answered. "But a few days of this
kind of sailing, let me tell you, Mr. Stevens, make a great difference
in one's calculations."

"How fur off is the Gulf of Mexico?" he asked.

"About a couple of thousand miles."

"Oh, a couple of thousand miles. Well, an' what reckoning do you get
out o' that?"

"Suppose you put the ship's pace down at thirteen knots an hour?"

"I thought you made it fifteen?" he exclaimed, looking at me
suspiciously.

"Yes, but I don't suppose we shall keep that up. For the sake of
argument I call it thirteen?"

"Well?" cramming his mouth as he spoke.

"In twenty-four hours we shall have run a distance of three hundred and
twelve miles."

He nodded.

"Therefore, if we have the luck to keep up this pace of two knots
less than we are now actually doing, for fifteen days, we shall have
accomplished--let me see."

I drew out a pencil, and commenced a calculation on the back of an old
envelope.

"Three hundred and twelve multiplied by fifteen. Five times naught
are naught; three naughts and two are ten; add two thousand; we shall
have accomplished a distance of four thousand six hundred and eighty
miles--that is two thousand six hundred and eighty miles further than
we want to go."

He was puzzled (and well he might be) by my fluent figures, but would
not appear so.

"I understand," said he.

"Stop a bit," I exclaimed; "I want to show you something."

I entered the captain's cabin, procured a chart of the North and South
Atlantic, including the eastern American coast, and spread it upon the
table.

"The two thousand miles I have given you," said I, "would bring you
right off the Mississippi. See here."

He rose and stooped over the chart.

"The short cut to the Gulf," I continued, pointing with my pencil,
"is through the Florida Channel, clean through the Bahamas, where the
navigation is very ugly."

"I see."

"I wouldn't trust myself there without a pilot on any consideration,
and, of course," said I, looking at him, "we don't want a pilot."

"I should rayther think we don't," he answered, scowling at the chart.

"So," I went on, "to keep clear of ships and boats, which are sure
to board us if we get among these islands, I should steer round
the Caribees, do you see?--well away from them, and up through the
Caribbean Sea, into the Gulf. Do you follow me?"

"Yes, yes--I see."

"Now, Mr. Stevens," said I very gravely, "I want to do my duty to the
crew, and put them and myself in the way of getting ashore and clear
off from all bad consequences."

The scoundrel tried to meet my eyes, but could not; and he listened to
me, gazing the while on the chart.

"But I don't think I should succeed if I got among those islands
blocking up the entrance of the Gulf; and as to the Gulf itself, you
may take your oath it's full of ships, some of which will pick you up
before you reach the shore, whilst others are pretty certain to come
across the vessel you have abandoned, and then--look out!"

He swallowed some coffee hastily, stared at the chart, and said in a
surly voice, "What are you drivin' at?"

"Instead of our abandoning the ship in the Gulf of Mexico," I said, "my
opinion is that, in order to assure our safety, and lessen the chance
of detection, we ought to abandon her clear of these islands, to the
norrard of them, off this coast here--Florida," pointing to the chart.

"You think so?" he said, doubtfully, after a long pause.

"I am certain of it. We ought to land upon some uninhabited part of the
coast, travel along it northwards, until we reach a town, and there
represent ourselves as shipwrecked sailors. Ask your mates if I am not
right."

"Perhaps you are," he replied, still very dubious, though not speaking
distrustfully.

"If you select the coast of Florida, clear of all these islands, and
away from the track of ships, I'll undertake, with good winds, to put
the ship off it in nine or ten days. But I'll not answer for our safety
if you oblige me to navigate her into the Gulf of Mexico."

He continued looking at the chart for some moments, and I saw by the
movements of his lips that he was trying to spell the names of the
places written on the Florida coast outline, though he would not ask me
to help him.

At last he said--

"It's Fish and two others as chose New Orleans. _I_ have no fancy for
them half-an'-half places. What _I_ wanted was to get away into the
Gulf of Guinea, and coast along down to Congo, or that way. I know that
coast, but I never was in Amerikey, and," he added, fetching the chart
a blow with his fist, "curse me if I like the notion of going there."

"It won't do to be shifting about," said I, frightened that he would go
and get the crew to agree with him to run down to the African coast,
which would seriously prolong the journey, and end, for all I could
tell, in defeating my scheme; "we shall be running short of water and
eatable stores, and then we shall be in a fix. Make up your mind, Mr.
Stevens, to the Florida coast; you can't do better. We shall fetch it
in a few days, and once ashore, we can disperse in parties, and each
party can tell their own yarn if they are asked questions."

"Well, I'll talk to Fish and the others about it," he growled, going
back to his seat. "I think you're right about them West Indie Islands.
We must keep clear o' them. Perhaps some of 'em forrards may know what
this here Florida is like. I was never ashore there."

He fell to his breakfast again, and finding him silent, and
considering that enough had been said for the present, I left him.

I did not know how well I had argued the matter until that night, when
he came to me on the poop, at half-past eight, and told me that the men
were all agreed that it would be too dangerous to abandon the ship off
New Orleans, and that they preferred the notion of leaving her off the
Florida coast.

I asked him if I was to consider this point definitely settled, and on
his answering in the affirmative, I sang out to the man at the wheel to
keep her away a couple of points, and ordered some of the watch to haul
in a bit on the weather braces, explaining to Stevens that his decision
would bring our course a trifle more westerly.

I then told him that, with a good wind, I would give the ship eight or
nine days to do the run in, and recommended him to let the crew know
this, as they must now turn to and arrange, not only how they should
leave the ship--in what condition, whether with their clothes and
effects, as if they had had time to save them, or quite destitute, as
though they had taken to the boats in a hurry--but also make up their
minds as to the character of the story they should relate when they got
ashore.

He answered that all this was settled, as, of course, I was very well
aware; but then my reason for talking to him in this strain was to
convince him that I had no suspicion of the diabolical project he was
meditating against my life.

You will, perhaps, find it hard to believe that he and the others
should be so ignorant of navigation as to be duped by my false
reckonings and misstatements of distances. But I can aver from
experience that merchant-seamen are, as a rule, as ignorant and
thick-headed a body of men as any in this world--and scarcely a
handful in every thousand with even a small acquaintance with the
theoretical part of their calling. More than a knowledge of practical
seamanship is not required from them; and how many are proficient even
in this branch? Of every ship's company more than half always seem to
be learning their business; furling badly, reefing badly, splicing,
scraping, painting, cleaning badly; turning to lazily; slow up aloft,
negligent, with an immense capacity of skulking.

I am persuaded that had I not shown Stevens the chart, I could have
satisfied him that a southerly course would have fetched the coast
of America. The mistake I made was in being too candid and honest
with them in the beginning. But then I had no plan formed. I dared
not be tricky without plausibility, and without some definite end to
achieve. Now that I had got a good scheme in my head, I progressed with
it rapidly, and I felt so confident of the issue, in the boatswain's
pluck and my own energy, that my situation no longer greatly excited my
apprehensions, and all that I desired was that the hour might speedily
arrive when the boats with their cargo of rascals and cowards should
put off and leave the ship.




CHAPTER V.


Having no other log-book than my memory to refer to, I pass over six
days, in which nothing occurred striking enough for my recollection to
retain.

This brought us to Sunday; and on that day at noon we were, as nearly
as I can recall, in 37° north latitude and 50° west longitude.

In round numbers Bermuda lies in latitude 32° and longitude 65°. This
is close enough for my purpose. We had consequently some distance yet
to run before we should _heave to off the coast of Florida_. But we had
for five days carried a strong following wind with us, and were now
(heading west by south half south) driving eight or nine knots an hour
under a fresh wind forward of the port beam.

I own I was very glad to be able to keep well to the norrard of 30°;
for had the north-east trade winds got hold of the ship, I should not
have been able to accommodate the distances run to my scheme so well as
I now could with shifting winds blowing sometimes moderate gales.

The crew continued to behave with moderation. The carpenter, indeed,
grew more coarse and offensive in manner as the sense of his importance
and of his influence over the men grew upon him; and there were times
when Johnson and Fish put themselves rather disagreeably forward; but I
must confess I had not looked for so much decency of behaviour as was
shown by the rest of the men in a crew who were absolute masters of the
vessel.

But all the same, I was not to be deceived by their apparent
tractableness and quiet exterior. I knew but too well the malignant
purpose that underlay this reposeful conduct, and never addressed
them but felt that I was accosting murderers, who, when the moment
should arrive, would watch their victims miserably drown, with horrid
satisfaction at the success of their cruel remedy to remove all chance
of their apprehension.

On this Sunday, old Mr. Robertson came on deck for the first time,
accompanied by his daughter, who had not before been on the poop in the
daytime.

It was my watch on deck; had it been the carpenter's, I should have
advised them to keep below.

What I had feared had now come to pass. Mr. Robertson's memory was
gone. He could recall nothing; but what was more pitiful to see,
though it was all for the best so far as he was concerned, he made no
effort to recollect. Nothing was suggestive; nothing, that ever I could
detect, put his mind in labour. His daughter spoke to me about this
melancholy extinction of his memory, but not with any bitterness of
sorrow.

"It is better," she said, "that he should not remember the horrors of
that shipwreck, nor understand our present dreadful position."

It was indeed the sense of our position that took her mind away from
too active a contemplation of her father's intellectual enfeeblement.
There was never a more devoted daughter, more tender, gentle,
unremitting in her foresight of his wants; and yet, in spite of
herself, the feeling of her helplessness would at times overpower her;
that strong and beautiful instinct in women which makes them turn for
safety and comfort to the strength of men whom they can trust, would
master her. I knew, I felt through signs touching to me as love, how
she looked to me out of her loneliness, out of the deeper loneliness
created in her by her father's decay, and wondered that I, a rough
sailor, little capable of expressing all the tenderness and concern
and strong resolutions that filled my heart, should have the power to
inspirit and pacify her most restless moods. In view of the death that
might await us--for hope and strive as we might, we could pronounce
nothing certain--it was exquisite flattery to me, breeding in me,
indeed, thoughts which I hardly noted then, though they were there to
make an epoch in my life, to feel her trust, to witness the comfort my
presence gave her, to receive her gentle whispers that she had no fear
now; that I was her friend; that she knew me as though our friendship
was of old, old standing!

I say, God bless her for her faith in me! I look back and know that I
did my best. She gave me courage, heart, and cunning; and so I owed my
life to her, for it was these things that saved it.

She exactly knew the plans concerted by the boatswain and myself, and
was eager to help us; but I could find no part for her.

However, this Sunday afternoon, whilst I stood near her, talking in a
low voice, her father sitting in a chair that I had brought from the
cuddy, full in the sun, whose light seemed to put new life into him--I
said to her with a smile--

"If to-night is dark enough, the boatswain must be drowned."

"Yes," she answered, "I know. It will not be too soon, you think?"

"No. I shall not be easy until I get him stowed away in the hold."

"You will see," she exclaimed, "that the poor fellow takes plenty to
eat and drink with him?"

"A good deal more than he wants is already there," I answered. "For the
last three days he has been dropping odds and ends of food down the
fore hatch. Let the worst come to the worst, he had smuggled in enough,
he tells me, to last him for a fortnight. Besides, the water-casks are
there."

"And how will he manage to sleep?"

"Oh, he'll coil up and snug himself away anyhow. Sailors are never
pushed for a bedstead: anything and everything serves. The only part
of the job that will be rather difficult is the drowning him. I don't
know anything that will make a louder splash and sink quickly too, than
a box of nails. The trouble is to heave it overboard without the man
at the wheel seeing me do it; and I must contrive to let him think that
the boatswain is aft, before I raise the splash, because if this matter
is not ship-shape and carried out cleverly, the man, whoever he may be
that takes the wheel, will be set thinking and then get on to talking.
Now, not the shadow of a suspicion must attend this."

"May I tell you how I think the man who is steering can be deceived?"

"By all means."

She fixed her eyes on the sea and said--

"I must ask some questions first. When you come on deck, will it be the
boatswain's or the carpenter's turn to go downstairs?"

"The carpenter's. He must be turned in before I move."

"And will the same man be at the wheel who steered the ship during the
carpenter's watch?"

"No. He will be relieved by a man out of the port watch."

"Now I understand. What I think is that the man who comes to take the
other one's place at the wheel ought to see the boatswain as he passes
along the deck. The boatswain should stand talking with you in full
sight of this man, that is, near the wheel, if the night is dark, so
that he can hear his voice, if he cannot distinguish his face; and when
all is quiet in the fore part of the ship, then you and he should walk
away and stand yonder," pointing, as she spoke, to the creak of the
poop.

I listened to her with interest and curiosity.

"Some one must then creep up and stand beside you, and the boatswain
must instantly slip away and hide himself. The case of nails ought
to be ready in one of those boats; you and the person who takes the
boatswain's place must then go to the boat, and one of you, under
pretence of examining her, must get the box of nails out on to the
rails ready to be pushed over-boards. Then the new-comer must crouch
among the shadows and glide away off the poop, and when he is gone you
must push the box over into the sea and cry out."

"The plot is perfect," I exclaimed, struck not more by its ingenuity
than the rapidity with which it had been conceived. "There is only one
drawback--who will replace the bo'sun? I dare not trust the steward."

"You will trust me?" she said.

I could not help laughing, as I exclaimed, "You do not look like the
bo'sun."

"Oh, that is easily done," she replied, slightly blushing, and yet
looking at me bravely. "If he will lend me a suit of his clothes, I
will put them on."

To spare her the slightest feeling of embarrassment, I said--

"Very well, Miss Robertson. It will be a little masquerading, that
is all. I will give you a small sou'wester that will hide your
hair--though even that precaution should be unnecessary, for if the
night is not dark, the adventure must be deferred."

"It is settled!" she exclaimed, with her eyes shining. "Come! I knew I
should be able to help. You will arrange with the boatswain, and let me
know the hour you fix upon, and what signal you will give me to steal
up on deck and place myself near you."

"You are the bravest girl in the world! you are fit to command a ship!"
I exclaimed.

She smiled as she answered, "A true sailor's compliment, Mr. Royle."
Then with a sudden sigh and a wonderful change of expression, making
her beauty a sweet and graceful symbol of the ever-changing sea, she
cried, looking at her father--

"May God protect us and send us safely home! I dare not think too much.
I hope without thinking. Oh, Mr. Royle, how shall you feel when we are
starting for dear England? This time will drive me mad to remember!"




CHAPTER VI.


I shall never forget the deep anxiety with which I awaited the coming
on of the night, my feverish restlessness, the exultation with which I
contemplated my scheme, the miserable anguish with which I foreboded
its failure.

It was like tossing a coin--the cry involving life or death!

If Stevens detected the stratagem, my life was not worth a rushlight,
and the thoughts of Mary Robertson falling a victim to the rage of the
crew was more than my mind could be got to bear upon.

Stevens came on deck at four o'clock in the afternoon, and that
I might converse with the boatswain without fear of incurring the
carpenter's suspicion, I brought a chart from the captain's cabin and
spread it on the cuddy table, right under the after skylight, and
whilst the boatswain and I hung over it, pretending to be engaged in
calculations, we completed our arrangements.

He was struck with the boldness of Miss Robertson's idea, and said he
would as soon trust her to take part in the plot as any stout-hearted
man. He grinned at the notion of her wearing his clothes, and told me
he'd make up a bundle of his Sunday rig, and leave it out for me to put
into her cabin.

"She'll know how to shorten what's too lengthy," said he; "and you'd
better tell her to take long steps ven she walks, for vimmen's legs
travels twice as quick as a man's, and that's how I alvays knows vich
sex is hacting before me in the theaytre, though, to be sure, some
o' them do dress right up to the hammer, and vould deceive their own
mothers."

"Are the hatches off forrard?"

"You leave that to me, Mr. Royle. That'll be all right."

"What weapon have you got?"

"Only a bar of iron the size of my leg," he answered, grimly. "I
shouldn't like to drop it on my foot by accident."

We brought our hurried conversation to a close by perceiving the
carpenter staring at us stedfastly through the skylight; and whispering
that everything now depended upon the night being dark, I repaired with
my chart to the cabin I occupied.

I noticed at this time that the lid of one of the lockers stood a
trifle open, sustained by the things inside it, which had evidently
been tumbled and not put square again.

This, on inspecting the locker, I found to be the case; and remembering
that here was the bag of silver I had come across while searching for
clothes for old Mr. Robertson, I thrust my hand down to find it. It was
gone. "So, Mr. Stevens," thought I, "this is some of your doing, is it?
A thief as well as a murderer! You grow accomplished." Well, if he had
the silver in his pocket when he quitted the ship, it would only drown
him the sooner, should he find himself overboard. There was comfort in
that reflection, any way; and I should have been perfectly willing that
the silver had been gold, could the rogue's death have been hastened by
the transmutation.

A little before six o'clock, at which hour I was to relieve the
boatswain in order to take charge of the ship through the second
dog-watch, Stevens being in his cabin and all quiet in the after part
of the vessel, I went quietly down the ladder that conducted to
the steerage, this ladder being situated some dozen feet abaft the
mizzen-mast.

All along the starboard side of the ship in this part of her were
stowed upwards of seven hundred boxes of tin-tacks, each box about
twice the breadth and length of this book in your hand, and weighing
pretty heavy. There was nothing else that I could think of that would
so well answer the purpose of making a splash alongside, as one of
these boxes, and which combined the same weight in so handy and
portable a bulk. Anything in wood must float; anything in iron might
be missed. All these things had to be carefully considered, for, easy
as the job of dropping a weight overboard to counterfeit the sound
of a human body fallen into the water may seem, yet in my case the
difficulty of accomplishing it successfully, and without the chance
of subsequent detection, was immense, and demanded great prudence and
foresight.

I conveyed one of these boxes to my cabin, and when four bells were
struck (the hands kept the relief bells going for their own sakes, I
giving them the time each day at noon), I smuggled it up in a topcoat,
and stepped with an easy air on to the poop. The man who had been
steering was in the act of surrendering the spokes to another hand, and
I took advantage of one of them cutting off a piece of tobacco for the
other, which kept them both occupied, to put my coat and the box inside
it in the stern sheets of the port quarter-boat, as though it were my
coat only which I had deposited there out of the road, handy to slip on
should I require it.

The boatswain observed my action without appearing to notice it; and as
he passed me on the way to the cuddy, he said that his clothes would
be ready by eight bells for the lady, and that I should find them in a
bundle near the door.

He would not stay to say more; for I believe that the carpenter had
found something suspicious in our hanging together over the chart, and
had spoken to this effect to his chums among the men; and it therefore
behoved the boatswain and me to keep as clear of each other as possible.

One stroke of fortune, however, I saw was to befall us. The night,
unless a very sudden change took place, would be dark.

The sky was thick, with an even and unbroken ground of cloud which had
a pinkish tint down in the western horizon, where the sun was declining
behind it. The sea was rough, and looked muddy. The wind held steady,
but blew very fresh, and had drawn a trifle further to the southwards,
so that the vessel was a point off her course. The motion of the ship
was very uncomfortable, the pitching sharp and irregular, and she
rolled as quickly as a vessel of one hundred tons would.

As the shadows gathered upon the sea, the spectacle of the
leaden-coloured sky and waves was indescribably melancholy. Some
half-dozen Mother Carey's chickens followed in our wake, and I watched
their grey breasts skimming the surface of the waves until they grew
indistinguishable on the running foam. The look of the weather was
doubtful enough to have justified me in furling the main top-gallant
sail and even single reefing the two topsails; but though this canvas
did not actually help the ship's progress, as she was close to the
wind, and it pressed her over and gave her much leeway, yet I thought
it best to let it stand, as it suggested an idea of speed to the men
(which I took care the log should confirm), and I should require to
make a long reckoning on the chart next day to prove to Stevens that we
were fast nearing the coast of Florida.

At eight o'clock I called Stevens, and saw him well upon deck before I
ventured to enter the boatswain's berth. I then softly opened the door,
and heard the honest fellow snoring like a trooper in his bunk; but
the parcel of clothes lay ready, and I at once took them, and knocked
lightly on Miss Robertson's door.

She immediately appeared, and I handed her the clothes and also my
sou'wester, which I had taken from my cabin after quitting the deck.

"What is to be the signal?" she asked.

"Three blows of my heel over your cabin. There is a spare cabin next
door for you to use, as your father ought not to see you."

"I will contrive that he does not see me," she answered. "He fell
asleep just now when I was talking to him. I had better not leave him,
for if he should wake up and call for me, I should not like to show
myself in these clothes for fear of frightening him; whereas if I stop
here I can dress myself by degrees and can answer him without letting
him see me."

"There is plenty of time," I said. "The bo'sun relieves the carpenter
at midnight. I will join the bo'sun when the carpenter has left the
deck. Here is my watch--you have no means of knowing the time without
quitting your cabin."

"Is the night dark?"

"Very dark. Nothing could be better. Have no fear," I said, handing her
my watch; "we shall get the bo'sun safely stowed below, and with him a
crow-bar. The carpenter will find it rather harder than he imagines to
scuttle the ship. He--I mean the bo'sun--is sound asleep, and snoring
like a field-marshal on the eve of glory. His trumpeting is wonderfully
consoling, for no man could snore like that who forbodes a dismal
ending of life."

I took her hand, receiving as I did so a brave smile from her hopeful,
pretty face, and left her.

Without much idea of sleeping, I lay down under a blanket, but fell
asleep immediately, and slept as soundly, if not as noisily, as the
boatswain, until eleven o'clock.

The vessel's motion was now easier; she did not strain, and was more on
an even keel, which either meant that the wind had fallen or that it
had drawn aft.

I looked through the porthole, to see if I could make anything of the
night, but it was pitch dark. I lighted a pipe to keep me awake,
and lay down again to think over our plot, and find, if I could, any
weakness in it, but felt more than ever satisfied with our plans. The
only doubtful point was whether the fellow who went down to scuttle
the ship would not get into the forepeak; but if the boatswain could
contrive to knock a hole in the bulkhead, he would have the man,
whether he got down through the forecastle or the fore-hatch; and this
I did not question he would manage, for he was very well acquainted
with the ship's hold and the disposition of the cargo.

I found myself laughing once when I thought of the fright the scoundrel
(whoever it might be) would receive from the boatswain--he would think
he had met the devil or a ghost; but I did not suppose the boatswain
would give him much time to be afraid, if he could only bring that
crow-bar, as big as his leg, to bear.

The sounds of eight bells being struck, set my heart beating rather
quickly, and almost immediately I heard Stevens' heavy step coming down
the companion-ladder.

I lay quiet, thinking he might look in, as it would better suit
my purpose to let him think me asleep. He went and roused out the
boatswain, and after a little the boatswain went on deck.

But Stevens did not immediately turn in. I cautiously abstracted the
key, and looked through the keyhole, and observed him bring out a
bottle of rum and a tumbler from the pantry, and help himself to a
stiff glass. He swallowed the fiery draught with his back turned upon
the main-deck, that the men, if any were about, should not see him; and
drying his lips by running his sleeve, the whole length of his arm,
over them, he replaced the bottle and glass, and went to his cabin.

This was now my time. There was nothing to fear from his finding me
on deck should he take it into his head to come up, since it was
reasonable that I, acting as skipper, should at any and all hours be
watching the weather, and noting the ship's course, more particularly
now, when we were supposed to be drawing near land.

Still, I left my cabin quietly, as I did not want him to hear me, and
sneaked up through the companion on tiptoe.

The night was not so pitch dark as I might have expected from the
appearance of it through the port-hole; but it was quite dark enough to
answer my purpose. For instance, it was as much as I could do to follow
the outline of the mainmast, and the man at the wheel and the wheel
itself, viewed from a short distance, were lumped into a blotch, though
there was a halo of light all around the binnacle.

The lamp that was alight in the cuddy hung just abaft the foremost
skylight, and I saw that it would be necessary to cover the glass. So I
stepped up to the boatswain, who stood near the mizzen-mast.

"Are you all ready, bo'sun?"

"All ready."

"Not afraid of the rats?" I said, with a laugh.

"No, nor wuss than rats," he replied. "Has the lady got my clothes on
yet? I _should_ like to see her."

"She'll come when we are ready. That light shining on the skylight must
be concealed. I don't want to put the lamp out, and am afraid to draw
the curtains for fear the rings should rattle. There's a tarpaulin in
the starboard quarter-boat, take and throw it over the skylight whilst
I go aft and talk to the fellow steering. Who is he?"

"Jim Cornish."

He found the tarpaulin, and concealed the light, whilst I spoke to the
man at the wheel about the ship's course, the look of the weather, and
so on.

"Now," said I, rejoining the boatswain, "come and take two or three
turns along the poop, that Cornish may see us together."

We paced to and fro, stopping every time we reached the wheel to look
at the compass.

When we were at the fore end of the poop I halted.

"Walk aft," I said, "and post yourself right in the way of Cornish,
that he shan't be able to see along the weather side of the poop."

I followed him until I had come to the part of the deck that was right
over Miss Robertson's cabin, and there struck three smart blows with
the heel of my boot, at the same time flapping my hands against my
breast so as to make Cornish believe that I was warming myself.

I walked to the break of the poop and waited.

In less time than I could count twenty a figure came out of the cuddy
and mounted the poop ladder, and stood by my side. Looking close into
the face I could see that it was rather too white to be a sailor's,
that was all. The figure was a man's, most perfectly so.

"Admirable!" I whispered, grasping her hand.

I posted her close against the screened skylight, that her figure might
be on a level with the mizzen-mast viewed from the wheel, and called to
the boatswain.

The tone of my voice gave him his cue. He came forward just as a man
would to receive an order.

"She is here," I said, turning him by the arm to where Miss Robertson
stood motionless. "For God's sake get forward at once! Lose no time!"

He went up to her and said--

"I'm sorry I can't see you properly, miss. If this wur daylight I
reckon you'd make a handsome sailor, just fit for the gals to go
dreamin' an' ravin' about."

With which, and waving his hand, the plucky fellow slipped off the poop
like a shadow, and I watched him glide along the main-deck until he
vanished.

"Now," whispered I to my companion, "the tragedy begins. We must walk
up and down that the man steering may see us. Keep on the left side of
the deck; it is higher than where I shall walk, and will make you look
taller."

I posted her properly, and we began to measure the deck.

Anxious as I was, I could still find time to admire the courage of this
girl. At no sacrifice of modesty--no, not even to the awakening of an
instant's mirth in me--was her noble and beautiful bravery illustrated.
Her pluck was so grand an expression of her English character, that no
emotion but that of profound admiration of her moral qualities could
have been inspired in the mind of any man who beheld her.

I took care not to go further than the mizzen-rigging, so that Cornish
should distinguish nothing but our figures; and after we had paraded
the deck awhile I asked her to stand near the quarter-boat in which I
had placed the box.

I then got on to the rail and fished out the box smartly, and stood it
on the rail.

"Keep your hand upon it," said I, "that it may not roll overboard."

With which I walked right up to Cornish.

"Does she steer steady?"

"True as a hair."

"I left my coat this afternoon in one of the quarter-boats. Have you
seen it?"

"No."

"Perhaps it's in the starboard-boat."

I pretended to search, and then drawing close to Miss Robertson, said
quickly--

"Creep away now. Keep close to the rail and crouch low. Get to your
cabin and change your dress. Roll the clothes you are wearing in a
bundle and hide them for the present."

She glided away on her little feet, stooping her head to a level with
the rail.

All was quiet forward--the main-deck deserted. I waited some seconds,
standing with my hand on the box, and then I shoved it right overboard.
It fell just as I had expected, with a thumping splash.

Instantly I roared out, "Man overboard! Down with your helm! The
bo'sun's gone!" and to complete the imposture I bounded aft, cut away a
life-buoy, and flung it far into the darkness astern.

Cornish obeyed me literally; put the helm right down, and in a few
moments the sails were shaking wildly.

"Steady!" I shouted. "Aft here and man the port main-braces! Bear a
hand! the bo'sun's overboard!"

My excitement made my voice resonant as a trumpet, and the men in both
watches came scampering along the deck. The shaking of the canvas, the
racing of feet, my own and the cries of the crew, produced, as you may
credit, a fine uproar. Of course I had foreseen that there would be no
danger in bringing the ship aback. The wind though fresh was certainly
not strong enough to jeopardize the spars; moreover, the sea had
moderated.

Up rushed the carpenter in a very short time, rather the worse, I
thought, for the dose he had swallowed.

"What's the matter! What the devil is all this?" he bellowed, lurching
from side to side as the ship rolled, for we were now broadside on.

"The bo'sun has fallen overboard!" I shouted in his ear; and I had need
to shout, for the din of the canvas was deafening.

"Do you say the bo'sun?" he bawled.

"Yes. What shall we do? is it too dark to pick him up?"

"Of course it is!" he cried, hoarse as a raven. "What do you want to
do? He's drownded by this time! Who's to find him? Give 'em the proper
orders, Mr. Royle!" and he vociferated to the men--"Do you want the
masts to carry away? Do you want to be overhauled by the fust wessel as
comes this road, and hanged, every mother's son of you, because the
bo'sun's fallen overboard?"

I stood to leeward gazing at the water and uttering exclamations to
show my concern and distress at the loss of the boatswain.

Stevens dragged me by the arm.

"Give 'em the proper orders, I tell ye, Mr. Royle!" he cried. "I say
that the bo'sun's drownded, and that no stopping the wessel will save
him. Sing out to the men, for the Lord's sake! Let her fill again, or
we're damned!"

"Very well," I replied with a great air of reluctance, and I advanced
to the poop-rail and delivered the necessary orders. By dint of
flattening in the jib-sheets and checking the main-braces, and brailing
up the spanker and rousing the foreyards well forward, I got the ship
to pay off. The carpenter worked like a madman, bawling all the while
that if the ship was dismasted all hands would certainly be hanged; and
he so animated the men by his cries and entreaties, that more work was
done by them in one quarter of an hour than they would have put into
treble that time on any other occasion.

It was now one o'clock, so it had not taken us an hour to drown the
boatswain, put the ship in irons, and get her clear again.

Stevens came off the main-deck on to the poop, greatly relieved in his
mind now that the sails were full and the yards trimmed, and asked me
how it happened that the boatswain fell overboard.

I replied, very gravely, that I had come on deck at eight bells, being
anxious to see what way the ship was making and how she was heading;
that remembering I had left an overcoat in one of the quarter-boats, I
looked, but could not find it; that I spoke to the boatswain, who told
me that he had seen the coat in the stern sheets of the quarter-boat
that afternoon, and got on to the poop-rail to search the boat; that
I had turned my head for a moment when I heard a groan, which was
immediately followed by a loud splash alongside, and I perceived that
the boatswain had vanished.

"So," continued I, "I pitched a life-buoy astern and sang out to put
the helm down; and I must say, Mr. Stevens, that I think we could have
saved the poor fellow had we tried. But you are really the skipper of
this ship, and since you objected I did not argue."

"There's no use sayin' we _could_ ha' saved him," rejoined Stevens,
gruffly. "I say we couldn't. Who's to see him in the dark? We should
have had to burn a flare for the boat to find us, and what with our
driftin' and their lumpin' about, missing their road, and doing no
airthly good, we should ha' ended in losin' the boat."

He did not notice the tarpaulin spread over the skylight, though I had
an explanation of its being there had he inquired the meaning of it.

He hung about the deck for a whole hour, though I had offered to take
the boatswain's watch, and go turn and turn about with him (Stevens),
and he had a long yarn with the man at the wheel, which I contrived
to drop in upon after awhile, and found Cornish explaining exactly
how the boatswain fell overboard, and corroborating my story in every
particular.

Thus laborious as my stratagem had been, it was, as this circumstance
alone proved, in no sense too laboured; for had not Cornish seen, with
his own eyes, the boatswain and myself standing near the boat just
before I gave the alarm, he would in all probability have represented
the affair in such a way to Stevens as to set him doubting my story,
and perhaps putting the men on to search the ship, to see if the
boatswain _was_ overboard.

He went below at two o'clock.

The sea fell calm, and the wind shifted round to the nor'ard and
westward, and was blowing a steady pleasant breeze at six bells. The
stars came out and the horizon cleared, and looking to leeward I beheld
at a distance of about four miles the outline of a large ship, which,
when I brought the binocular glasses to bear on her, I found under full
sail.

She was steering a course seemingly parallel with our own, and as I
watched her my brains went to work to conceive in what possible way I
could utilize her presence.

At all events, the first thing I had to do was to make sail, or she
would run away from us; so I at once called up the watch.

Whilst the men were at work the dawn broke, and by the clearer light
I perceived that the vessel was making a more westerly course than
we, and was drawing closer to us at every foot of water we severally
measured. She was a noble-looking merchantman, like a frigate with her
painted ports, with double topsail and top-gallant yards, and with
skysails set, so that her sails were a wonderful volume and tower of
canvas.

The sight of her filled me with emotions I cannot express. As to
signalling her, I knew that the moment the men saw me handling the
signal-halliards they would crowd aft and ask me what I meant to do.
I might indeed hail her if I could sheer the _Grosvenor_ close enough
alongside for my voice to carry; but if they failed to hear me or
refused to help, what would be my position? So surely as I raised my
voice to declare our situation, so surely would the crew drag me down
and murder me out of hand.

Presently Fish and Johnson came along the main-deck, and while Fish
entered the cuddy Johnson came up to me.

"Hadn't you better put the ship about?" he said. "You're running us
rather close. The men don't like it."

Seeing that no chance would be given me to make my peril known to the
stranger, I formed my resolution rapidly. I called out to the men--

"Johnson wants to 'bout ship. Yonder vessel can see that we are
making a free wind, and she'll either think we're mad or that there's
something wrong with us if we 'bout ship with a beam wind. Now just
tell me what I am to do."

"Haul us away from that ship--that's all we want," answered one of them.

At this moment the carpenter came running up the poop ladder, with
nothing on but his shirt and a pair of breeches.

"Hallo!" he called out fiercely; "what are you about? Do you want to
put us alongside!"

And he bawled out fiercely--"Port your helm! run right away under her
stern!"

"If you do that," I exclaimed, very anxious now to show how
well-intentioned I was, "you will excite her suspicions. Steady!" I
cried, seeing the ship drawing rapidly ahead; "bring her to again a
point off her course."

Stevens scowled at me, but did not speak.

The crew clustered up the poop ladder to stare at the ship, and I
caught some of them casting such threatening looks at me, that I wanted
no better hint of the kind of mercy I should receive if I played them
any tricks.

"Mr. Stevens," said I, "leave me to manage, and I'll do you no wrong.
That ship is making more way than we are, and we shall have her dead on
end presently. Then I'll show you what to do."

As I spoke, the vessel which we had brought well on the port-bow
hoisted English colours. The old ensign soared gracefully, and stood
out at the gaff-end.

"We must answer her," I exclaimed to the carpenter. "You had better
bend on the ensign and run it up."

I suppose he knew that there could be no mischievous meaning in the
display of this flag, for he obeyed me, though leisurely.

The ship, when she saw that we answered her, hauled her ensign down,
and after awhile, during which she sensibly increased the distance
between us, and had drawn very nearly stern on, hoisted her number.

"Run up the answering pennant," I exclaimed; "it will look civil any
way, and it means nothing."

I pointed out the signal to the carpenter, who hoisted it; but I could
see by his face that he meant to obey no more orders of this kind.

"Steady as she goes!" cried I, to the fellow steering. "A hand let go
the weather mizzen-braces and haul in some of you to leeward."

This manoeuvre laid the sails on the mizzen-mast aback; they at once
impeded our way, nor, being now right ahead of us, could the people on
board the ship see what we had done. The result was the vessel drew
away rapidly, I taking care to luff as she got to windward, so as to
keep our flying jib-boom in a direct line with her stern.

To judge by the way the men glanced at me and spoke to one another,
they evidently appreciated this stratagem: and Stevens condescended to
say, "That's one for her."

"Better than going about," I answered drily.

"They've hauled down them signals," he said, blinking the point I
raised by my remark.

"Yes. She doesn't mean to stop to ask any questions."

The end of this was that in about twenty minutes the ship was three or
four miles ahead of us; so not choosing to lose any more time, I swung
the mizzen-yards, and got the _Grosvenor_ upon her course again.

Stevens went below to put on his coat and cap and boots in order to
relieve me, for it was now four o'clock. The dawn had broken with
every promise of a fine day, and where the sun rose the sky resembled
frost-work, layer upon layer of high delicate clouds, ranged like scale
armour, all glittering with silver brightness and whitening the sea,
over which they hung with a pale, pearly light.

I was thoroughly exhausted, not so much from the want of rest as from
the excitement I had gone through. Still, I had a part to play before
I turned in; so I stuck my knuckles in my eyes to rub them open, and
waited for Stevens, who presently came on deck, having first stopped on
the main-deck to grumble to his crony Fish over his not having had a
quarter of an hour's sleep since midnight.

"I'm growed sick o' the sight o' this poop," he growled to me. "Sick o'
the sight o' the whole wessel. Fust part o' the woyage I was starved
for food. Now, with the skipper overboard, I'm starved for sleep. How
long are we going to take to reach Florida? Sink me if I shouldn't ha'
woted for some nearer coast had I known this woyage wur going to last
to the day o' judgment."

"If it don't fall calm," I answered, "I may safely promise to put you
off the coast of Florida on Friday afternoon."

He thrust his hands into his breeches' pockets, and stared aft.

"I am very much troubled about the loss of the bo'sun," said I.

"Are you?" he responded, ironically.

"He was a civil man and a good sailor."

"Yes; I dessay he was. But he's no use now."

"He deserved that we should have made an effort to save him."

"Well, you said that before, and I said no; and I suppose I know wot I
mean when I says no."

"But won't the crew think me a heartless rascal for not sending a boat
to the poor devil?" I demanded, pretending to lose my temper.

"The bo'sun was none so popular--don't make no mistake; he wasn't one
of----Hell seize me! where are you drivin' to, Mr. Royle? Can't you
let a drownded man alone?" he cried, with an outburst of passion. But
immediately he softened his voice, and with a look of indescribable
cunning, said, "Some of the hands didn't like him, of course; and some
did, and they'll be sorry. I am one of them as did, and would ha' saved
him if I hadn't feared the masts, and reckoned there'd be no use in the
boat gropin' about in the dark for a drownin' man."

"No doubt of that," I replied, in a most open manner. "You know the
course, Mr. Stevens? You might set the fore-topmast stun'-sail
presently, for we shall have a fine day."

And with a civil nod I left him, more than ever satisfied that my
stratagem was a complete success.

I bent my ear to Miss Robertson's cabin as I passed, to hear if she
were stirring; all was still; so I passed on to my berth, and turned in
just as I was, and slept soundly till eight o'clock.




CHAPTER VII.


I only saw Miss Robertson for a few minutes at breakfast-time.

The steward as usual carried their breakfast on a tray to the door, and
in taking it in she saw me and came forward.

"Is it all well?" she asked, quickly and eagerly.

"All well," I replied.

"He is in the hold," she whispered, "and no one knows?"

"He is in the hold, and the crew believe to a man that he is overboard."

"It is a good beginning," she exclaimed, with a faint smile playing
over her pale face.

"Thanks to your great courage! You performed your part admirably."

"There is that hateful carpenter watching us through the skylight,"
she whispered, without raising her eyes. "Tell me one thing before I
go--when will the ship reach the part she is to stop at?"

"I shall endeavour to make it Friday afternoon."

"The day after to-morrow!"

She clasped her hands suddenly and exclaimed with a little sob in her
voice, "Oh, let us pray that God will be merciful and protect us!"

I had no thoughts for myself as I watched her enter her cabin. The
situation was, indeed, a dreadful one for so sweet and helpless a woman
to be placed in. I, a rough, sturdy fellow, used to the dangers of the
sea, was scared at our position when I contemplated it. Truly might I
say that our lives hung by a hair, and that whether we were to live or
perish dismally would depend upon the courage and promptness with which
the boatswain and I should act at the last moment.

It was worse for me that I did not know the exact plans of the
mutineers.

I was aware that their intention was to scuttle the ship and leave her,
with us on board, to sink. But _how_ they would do this, I did not
know. I mean, I could not foresee whether they would scuttle the ship
whilst all the crew remained on board, stopping until they knew that
the vessel was actually sinking before taking to the boats, or whether
they would get into the boat, leaving one man in the hold to scuttle
the ship, and lying by to take him off when his work should have been
performed.

Either was likely; but one would make our preservation comparatively
easy; the other would make it almost impossible.

When I went on deck all hands were at breakfast. The carpenter quitted
the poop the moment I showed myself, and I was left alone, none of the
crew visible but the steersman.

The breeze was slashing, a splendid sailing wind; the fore-topmast
stun'-sail set, every sail round and hard as a drum skin, and the water
smooth; the ship bowled along like a yacht in a racing match. Nothing
was in sight all round the horizon.

I made sure that the carpenter would go to bed as soon as he had
done breakfast; but instead, about twenty minutes after he had left
the poop, I saw him walk along the main-deck, and disappear in the
forecastle.

After an interval of some ten minutes he reappeared, followed by
Johnson, the cook, and a couple of hands. They got upon the port side
of the long-boat, and presently I heard the fluttering and screaming of
hens.

I crossed the poop to see what was the matter, and found all four men
wringing the necks of the poultry. In a short time about sixteen hens,
all that remained, lay dead in a heap near the coop. The cook and
Johnson gathered them up, and carried them into the galley.

Soon after they returned, and clambered on to the top of the long-boat,
the cover of which they pitched off, and fell, each with a knife in his
hand, upon the pigs. The noise now was hideous. The pigs squealed like
human beings, but both men probably knew their work, for the screeching
did not last above five minutes.

The cook, with his face, arms, and breeches all bloody, flung the
carcases among the men, who had gathered around to witness the sport,
and a deal of ugly play followed. They tossed the slaughtered pigs
at each other, and men and pigs fell down with tremendous thuds, and
soon there was not a man who did not look as though he had been rolled
for an hour in the gutter of a shambles. Their hoarse laughter, their
horrible oaths, their rage not more shocking than their mirth, the
live men rolling over the dead pigs, their faces and clothes ghastly
with blood--all this was a scene which made one abhor oneself for
laughing at it, though it was impossible to help laughing sometimes.
But occasionally my mirth would be checked by a sudden spasm of terror,
when I caught sight of a fellow with an infuriate face, monstrous with
its crimson colouring, rush with his knife at another, and be struck
down like a ninepin by a dead pig hurled full at his head, before he
could deliver his blow.

The saturnalia came to an end, and the men cursing, growling,
groaning, and laughing--some reeling half stunned, and all panting for
breath--surged into the forecastle to clean themselves, while the cook
and Johnson carried the pigs into the galley.

I did not quite understand what this scene heralded, but had not long
to wait before it was explained.

In twos and threes after much delay, the men emerged and began to wash
the decks down. Two got into the long-boat and began to clean her out.
Then the carpenter came aft with Johnson, and I heard him swearing at
the steward. After a bit, Johnson came forth, rolling a cask of cuddy
bread along the deck; after him went the steward, bearing a lime-juice
jar, filled of course with rum.

These things were stowed near the foremast. Then all three came aft
again (the carpenter superintending the work), and more provisions were
taken forward; and when enough was collected, the whole was snugged and
covered with a tarpaulin, ready, as I now understood, to be shipped
into the long-boat when she should have been swung over the ship's side.

These preparations brought the reality of the position of myself and
companions most completely home to me; yet I perfectly preserved my
composure, and appeared to take the greatest interest in all that was
going forward.

The carpenter came on the poop presently, and went to the starboard
quarter-boat and inspected it. He then crossed to the other boat. After
which he walked up to me.

"How many hands," he asked, "do you think the long-boat 'ud carry,
comfortable?"

I measured her with my eye before answering.

"About twenty," I replied.

"One on top o' t'other, like cattle!" he growled. "Why, mate, there
wouldn't be standin' room."

"Do you mean to put off from the ship in her?"

"In her and one of them others," he replied, meaning the quarter-boats.

"If you want my opinion, I should say that all hands ought to get into
the long-boat. She has heaps of beam, and will carry us all well.
Besides, she can sail. It will look better, too, to be found in her,
should we be picked up before landing; because you can make out that
both quarter-boats were carried away."

"We're all resolved," he answered doggedly. "We mean to put off in the
long-boat and one o' them quarter-boats. The quarter-boat can tow the
long-boat if it's calm. Why I ax'd you how many the long-boat 'ud carry
was because we don't want to overload the quarter-boat. We can use her
as a tender for stores and water, do you see, so that if we get to a
barren place we shan't starve."

"I understand."

"Them two boats 'll be enough, anyways."

"I should say so. They'd carry thirty persons between them," I answered.

To satisfy himself he went and took another look at the boats, and
afterwards called Johnson up to him.

They talked together for some time, occasionally glancing at me, and
Johnson then went away; but in a few minutes he returned with a mallet
and chisel. Both men now got into the port quarter-boat and proceeded,
to my rage and mortification, to rip a portion of the planking out
of her. In this way they knocked several planks away and threw them
overboard, and Johnson then got out of her and went to the other boat,
and fell to examining her closely to see that all was right; for they
evidently had made up their minds to use her, she being the larger of
the two.

The carpenter came and stood close to me, watching Johnson. I dare
say he expected I would ask him why he had injured the boat; but I
hardly dared trust myself to speak to him, so great was my passion and
abhorrence of the wretch whose motive in rendering this boat useless
was, of course, that we should not be able to save ourselves by her
when we found the ship sinking.

When Johnson had done, some men came aft, and they went to work to
provision the remaining quarter-boat, passing bags of bread, tins of
preserved meat, kegs of water, and stores of that description, from
hand to hand, until the boat held about a quarter as much again as she
was fit to carry.

In the mean time, others were busy in the long-boat, getting her fit
for sailing with a spare top-gallant stun'-sail boom and top-gallant
stun'-sail, looking to the oars and thole-pins and so forth.

The morning passed rapidly, the crew as busy as bees, smoking to a man,
and bandying coarse jokes with one another, and uttering loud laughs as
they worked.

The carpenter never once addressed me. He ran about the decks,
squirting tobacco-juice everywhere, superintending the work that
was going forward, and manifesting great excitement, with not a few
displays of bad temper.

A little before noon, when I made ready to take the sun's altitude, the
men at work about the long-boat suspended their occupation to watch
me, and Stevens drew aft, and came snuffling about my heels.

When I sang out eight bells, and went below to work out my
observations, he followed me into the cabin, and stood looking on. The
ignorance of his distrust was almost ludicrous; I believe he thought
I should work out a false reckoning if he were not by, but that his
watching would prevent me from making two and two five.

"Now, Mr. Royle," said he, seeing me put down my pencil; "where are we?"

I unrolled the chart upon the table, and drew a line down a rule from
the highly imaginary point to which I had brought the ship at noon on
the preceding day, to latitude 29°, longitude 74° 30'. "Here is our
position at the present moment," I said, pointing to the mark on the
chart.

"This here is Floridy, ain't it?" he demanded, outlining the coast
with his dirty thumb.

"That is Florida."

"Well, I calls it Floridy for short."

"Floridy then. I know what you mean."

"And you give us till the day arter tomorrow to do this bit o' distance
in?"

"It doesn't look much on the chart. There's not much room for miles to
show in on a square of paper like this."

"Well, we shall be all ready to lower away the boats when you give us
the word," said he.

"Perhaps you'll sit down for five minutes, Mr. Stevens, and inform me
exactly of your arrangements," I exclaimed; "for it is difficult for me
to do my share in this job unless I accurately know what yours is to
be."

He looked at me askant, his villainous eyes right in the corners of
their sockets; but sat down nevertheless, and tilted his cap over his
forehead in order to scratch the back of his head.

"I thought you knew what our plans was?" he remarked.

"Why, I've got a kind of general notion of them, but I should like to
understand them more clearly."

"Well, I thought they was clear--clear as mud in a wineglass.
Leastways, they're clear to all hands."

"For instance, why did you knock a hole in the quarter-boat this
morning?"

"I didn't think you'd want that explained," he answered promptly.

"But you see I do, Mr. Stevens."

"Well, we only want two boats, and it 'ud be a silly look-out to leave
the third one sound and tight to drift about with the _Grosvenor's_
name writ inside o' her."

"Why?"

"Because I says it would."

"How could she drift about if she were up at the davits?"

"How do I know?" he answered morosely. "I'm lookin' at things as may
happen. It ain't for me to explain of them."

"Very well," said I, master enough of the ruffian's meaning to require
no further information on this point.

"Anything more, Mr. Royle?"

"Yes. The next matter is this: you gave me to understand that we should
heave the ship to at night?"

"Sartinly. As soon as ever it comes on dusk, so as we shall have all
night before us to get well away."

"Do you mean to leave her with her canvas standing?"

"Just as she is when she's hove to."

"Some ship may sight her, and finding her abandoned, send a crew on
board to work her to the nearest port."

I thought this might tempt him to admit that she was to be scuttled,
which confession need not necessarily have involved the information
that I and the others were to be left on board.

But the fellow was too cunning to hint at such a thing.

"Let them as finds her keep her," he said, getting up. "That's their
consarn. Any more questions, Mr. Royle?"

"Are we to take our clothes with us?"

He grinned in the oddest manner.

"No. Them as has wallyables may shove 'em into their pockets; but no
kits 'll be allowed in the boats. We're a poor lot o' shipwrecked
sailors--marineers as the newspapers calls us--come away from a ship
that was settlin' under our legs afore we had the arts to leave her. We
jest had time to wittol the boats and stand for the shore. We depend
upon Christian kindness for 'elp; and if we falls foul o' a missionary,
leave me alone to make him vurship our piety. The skipper he fell mad
and jumped overboard. The chief mate he lost his life by springin' into
vun o' the boats and missin' of it; and the second mate he manfully
stuck to the ship for the love he bore her owners, and we pree-sume,
went down with her."

"Oh!" I exclaimed, forcing a laugh; "then I am not to admit that I am
the second mate, when questioned?"

He stared at me as if he were drunk, and cried, "_You!_" then burst
into a laugh, and hit me a slap on the back.

"Ah!" he exclaimed. "I forgot. Of course you'll not be second mate when
you get ashore."

"What then?"

"Why, a passenger--a parson--the ship's doctor. We'll tell you wot to
say as we go along. Come, get us off this bloomin' coast, will you, as
soon as you can," pointing to the chart. "All hands is growin' delikit
with care and consarn: as Joe Sampson used to sing--

    'Vith care an' consarn
    Ve're a vastin' avay.'

And our nerviss systems is that wrought up with fear of our necks, that
blowed if we shan't want two months o' strong physicking and prime
livin' at the werry least, to make men of us agin arter we're landed."

And with a leering grin and an ugly nod he quitted the cabin.




CHAPTER VIII.


I made up my mind as Stevens left me to bring this terrible time to an
end on Friday afternoon, come what might. Let it fall a calm, let it
blow a gale, on Friday afternoon I would tell the carpenter that the
ship was off the coast of Florida, forty or fifty miles distant.

If, by the boatswain's ruse, I could keep the ship afloat and carry her
to Bermuda, it would matter little whether we hove her to one hundred
or even two hundred miles distant from the island. The suspense I
endured, the horror of our situation, was more than I could bear. I
believed that my health and strength would give way if I protracted
the ship's journey to the spot where the men would leave her, even for
twenty-four hours longer than Friday.

The task before me then was to prepare for the final struggle, to
thoroughly mature my plans, to utilize the control I still had over
the ship to the utmost advantage, and to put into shape all plausible
objections and hints I could think upon, which would be helpful to me
if adopted by the crew.

What I most felt was the want of firearms. The revolver I carried was
indeed five-chambered, and there was much good fortune in my having
been the first to get hold of it. But could I have armed the boatswain
or even the steward with another pistol, I should have been much easier
in my mind when I contemplated the chances of a struggle between us and
the crew.

However, there is no evil that is not attended by some kind of
compensation, and I found this out; for taking it into my head that
there might be a pistol among Duckling's effects, though I was pretty
sure that the weapon he had threatened me with was the one in my
possession, I entered his cabin with the intention to begin a search,
but had no sooner opened the lid of his chest than I perceived that I
had been forestalled, for the clothes were tossed anyway, the pockets
turned inside out, and articles taken out of wrappers, as I should
judge from the paper coverings that lay among the clothes.

So now I could only hope that Duckling had _not_ had a pistol, since
whoever had rifled his box must have met with it. And that Stevens was
the thief in this as in the case of the silver I had no doubt at all.

There being now only two of us to keep watch, Stevens and I did not
meet at dinner. I took his place whilst he dined, and he then relieved
me.

The steward told me they were having a fine feast in the forecastle;
that upwards of ten of the fowls which had been strangled in the
morning had been put to bake for the men's dinner; that in addition to
this they had cooked three legs of pork, and were drinking freely from
a jar of rum which the carpenter had ordered him to take forward.

I could pretty well judge that they were enjoying themselves, by the
loud choruses they were singing.

Believing they would end in becoming drunk, I knocked on Miss
Robertson's door, to tell her on no account to show herself on deck.
She gave me her hand the moment she saw me, and gently brought me into
the cabin and made me sit down, though I had not meant to stay.

The old gentleman stood with his back to the door, looking through the
port-hole. Though he heard my voice, he did not turn, and only looked
round when his daughter pulled him by the arm.

"How do you do, sir?" he exclaimed, making me a most courtly bow. "I
hope you are well? You find us, sir," with a stately wave of the hand,
"in wretched accommodation; but all this will be mended presently. The
great lesson of life is patience."

And he made me another bow, meanwhile looking hard at me and
contracting his brows.

I was more affected by this painful change--this visible and rapid
decay, not of his memory only, but of his mind--than I know how to
describe. The mournful, helpless look his daughter gave him, the
tearless melancholy in her eyes, as she bent them on me, hit me hard.

I did not know how to answer him, and could only fix my eyes on the
deck.

"This prospect," he continued, pointing to the port-hole, "is
exceedingly monotonous. I have been watching it I should say a full
half-hour--about that time, my dear, should you not think?--and find
no change in it whatever. I witness always the same unbroken line of
water, slightly darker, I observe, than the sky which bends to meet
it. That unbroken line has a curious effect upon me. It seems to press
like a substantial ligature or binding upon my forehead; positively,"
he exclaimed, with a smile almost as sweet as his child's, "as though I
had a cord tied round my head."

He swept his hand over his forehead, as though he could remove the
sensation of tightness by the gesture. It was pitiful to witness such a
venerable and dignified old gentleman stricken thus in his mind by the
sufferings and miserable horrors of shipwreck.

"I think, sir," I said, addressing him with all the respectfulness I
could infuse into my voice, "that the uneasiness of which you complain
would leave you if you would lie down. The eye gets strained by staring
through a port-hole, and that eternal horizon yonder really grows a
kind of craze in one's head, if watched too long."

"You are quite right, sir," he replied, making me another bow; and,
addressing his daughter, "This gentleman sympathizes with the peculiar
inspirations of what I may call monotonous nature."

He looked at her with extraordinary and painful earnestness. Evidently,
some recollection had leaped into his mind and quitted him immediately,
leaving him bewildered by it.

He then said, in a most plaintive voice--

"I will lie down. Your shoulder, my love."

He stretched out his old trembling hand. I got up to help him, but he
withdrew from me with an air of offended pride, and reared his figure
to its full height.

"This is my daughter, sir," he exclaimed, with cold emphasis; and
though I knew he was not accountable for his behaviour, I shrunk back,
feeling more completely snubbed than ever I remember being in my life.

With her assistance he got into the bunk, and lay there quite still.

She drew close to me, and obliged me to share the seat she made of the
box which had contained the steward's linen.

"You are not angry with him?" she whispered.

"Indeed not."

"I shall lose him soon. He will not live long," she said, and tears
came into her eyes.

"God will spare him to you, Miss Robertson. Have courage. Our trials
are nearly ended. Once ashore he will recover his health--it is this
miserable confinement, this gloomy cabin, this absence of the comforts
he has been used to, that are telling upon his mind. He will live to
recall all this in his English home. The worst has never come until it
is passed--that is my creed; because the worst may be transformed into
good even when it is on us."

"_You_ have the courage," she answered, "not I. But you give me
courage. God knows what I should have done but for you."

I looked into her brave soft eyes, swimming in tears, and could have
spoken some deep thoughts to her then, awakened by her words.

I was silent a moment, and then said--

"You must not go on deck to-day. Indeed, I think you had better remain
below until I ask you to join me."

"Why? Is there any new danger?"

"Nothing you need fear. The men who fancy themselves very nearly at
their journey's end, threaten to grow boisterous. But my importance to
them is too great to allow them to offend me _yet_. Still, it will be
best for you to keep out of sight."

"I will do whatever you wish."

"I am sure you will. My wish is to save you--not my wish only--it is my
resolution. Trust in me wholly, Miss Robertson. Keep up your courage,
for I may want you to help me at the last."

"You must trust in me, too, as my whole trust is in you," she answered,
smiling.

I smiled back at her, and said--

"Now, let me tell you what may happen--what all my energies are and
have been engaged to bring about. On Friday afternoon I shall tell
the carpenter that the ship is fifty or sixty miles off the coast
of Florida. If the night is calm--and I pray that it may be--the
ship will be hove to, that is, rendered stationary on the water; the
long-boat will be slung over the side, and the quarter-boat lowered.
All _this_ is certain to happen. But now come my doubts. Will the crew
remain on board until the man they send into the hold to scuttle the
vessel rejoins them? or will they get into the boats and wait for him
alongside? If they take to the boats and wait for the man, the ship is
ours. If they remain on board, then our preservation will depend upon
the bo'sun."

"How?"

"He will either kill the man who gets into the hold, or knock him
insensible. He will then have to act as though _he_ were the man he has
knocked on the head."

"I see."

"If they call to him, he will have to answer them without showing
himself. Perhaps he will call to them. They will answer him. They will
necessarily muffle their voices that we who are aft may not suspect
what they are about. In that case the bo'sun may counterfeit the voice
of the man he has knocked on the head successfully."

"But what will he tell them?"

"Why, that his job is nearly finished, and that they had best take to
the boats and hold off for him, as he is scuttling her in half a dozen
places, and the people aft will find her sinking and make a rush to the
boats if they are not kept away. He will tell them that when he has
done scuttling her, he will run up and jump overboard and swim to them.
This, if done cleverly, may decide the men to shove off. We shall see."

"It is a clever scheme," she answered, musingly. "The boatswain's life
depends upon his success, and I believe he will succeed in duping them."

"What can be done he will do, I am sure," I said, not choosing to
admit that I had not her confidence in the stratagem, because I feared
that the more the boatswain should endeavour to disguise his voice the
greater would be the risk of its being recognised. "But let me tell you
that this is the worst view of the case. It is quite probable that the
men will take to the boats and wait for their mate to finish in the
hold, not only because it will save time, but because they will imagine
it an effectual way of compelling us to remain on the vessel.

"What villains! and if they take to the boats?"

"Then I shall want you."

"What can I do?"

"We shall see. There still remains a third chance. The carpenter is,
or I have read his character upside down, a born murderer. It is
possible that this villain may design to leave the man whom he sends
into the hold to sink with the ship. He has not above half a dozen
chums, confidential friends, among the crew; and it will be his and
their policy to rid themselves of the others as best they can, so
as to diminish the number of witnesses against them. If, therefore,
they contemplate this, they will leave the ship while they suppose
the act of scuttling to be actually proceeding. Now, amongst the many
schemes which have entered my mind, there was one I should have put
into practice had I not feared to commit any action which might in the
smallest degree imperil your safety. This scheme was to cautiously
sound the minds of the men who were not in the carpenter's intimate
confidence; ascertain how far they relished the notion of quitting
the ship for a shore that might prove inhospitable, or on which their
boats might be wrecked and themselves drowned, and discover by what
shrewdness I am master of, how many I might get to come over to my side
if the boatswain and myself turned upon Stevens and killed him, shot
down Johnson, and fell, armed with my revolver and a couple of belaying
pins, upon Cornish and Fish--these three men composing Stevens'
cabinet. I say that this was quite practicable, and no very great
courage required to execute it, as we should have killed or stunned
these men before they would be able to resist us."

"There would be nine left."

"Yes; but I should have reckoned upon some of them helping me."

"You could not have depended upon them."

"Well, we have another plan, and I refer to this only to show you a
specimen of some of the schemes which have come into my head."

"Mr. Royle, if you had a pistol to give me, I would help you to shoot
them! Show me how I can aid you in saving our lives, and I will do your
bidding!" she exclaimed, with her eyes on fire.

I put my finger on my lip and smiled.

She blushed scarlet and said, "You do not think me womanly to talk so!"

"You would not hate me were you to know my thoughts," I answered,
rising.

"Are you going, Mr. Royle?"

"Yes. Stevens, for all I know, may have seen me come in here. I would
rather he should find me in my own cabin."

"We see very little of you, considering that we are all three in one
small ship," she said, hanging her head.

"I never leave you willingly, and would be with you all day if I might.
But a rough sailor like me is poor company."

"Sailors are the best company in the world, Mr. Royle."

"Only one woman in every hundred thinks so--perhaps one in every
thousand. Well, you would see less of me than you do if I was not
prepared to lay down my life for you. No! I don't say that boastfully.
I have sworn in my heart to save you, and it shall cost me my life if I
fail. That is what I should have said."

She turned her back suddenly, and I hardly knew whether I had not said
too much. I stood watching her for a few moments, with my fingers on
the handle of the door. Finding she did not move, I went quietly out,
but as I closed the door I heard her sob. Now, what had I said to make
her cry? I did not like to go in again, and so I repaired to my cabin,
wishing, instead of allowing my conversation to drift into a personal
current, I had confined it to my plans, which I had not half unfolded
to her, but from which I had been as easily diverted as if they were a
bit of fiction instead of a living plot that our lives depended on.

During my watch from four to six, Stevens joined me, and asked how
"Floridy" would bear from the ship when she was hove to?

I told him that Florida was not an island, but part of the main coast
of North America, and that he might head the boats any point from
N.N.W. to S.S.W. and still, from a distance of fifty or sixty miles,
fetch some part of the Florida coast, which I dared say, showed a
seaboard ranging four hundred miles long.

This seemed new to him, which more than ever convinced me of his
ignorance, for though I had repeatedly pointed out Florida to him, yet
he did not know but that it was an island, which might easily be missed
by steering the boats a point out of the course given.

He then asked me what compasses we had that we might take with us.

"We shall only want one in the long-boat," I replied; "and there is one
on the table in the captain's cabin which will do. Have you got the
long-boat all ready?"

"Ay, clean as a new brass farden, and provisioned for a month."

"Now let me understand; when the ship is hove to you will sling the
long-boat over?"

"I explained all that before," he answered gruffly.

"Not that."

"You're hangin' on a tidy bit about them there boats. What do you
think?"

"I suppose my life is as good as yours, and that I have a right to find
out how we are to abandon this ship and make the shore," I answered,
with some show of warmth, my object being to get all the information
from him that was possible to be drawn. "You'll get the long-boat
alongside, and all hands will jump into her? Is that it?"

"Why, wot do you think we'd get the boat alongside for if we didn't get
into her?" he replied, with a kind of growling laugh.

"Will anybody be left on the ship?"

"Anybody left on the ship?" he exclaimed, fetching a sudden breath:
"Wot's put that in yer head?"

"I was afraid that that yellow devil, the cook, might induce you to
leave the steward behind to take his chance to sink or swim in her,
just out of revenge for calling bad pork good," said I, fixing my eyes
upon him.

"No, no, nothen of the sort," he replied quickly, and with evident
alarm. "Curse the cook! d'ye think I's skipper to give them kind o'
orders?"

"Now you see what I am driving at," I said, laying my hand on his arm,
and addressing him with a smile. "I really did think you meant to leave
the poor devil of a steward behind. And what I wanted to understand
was how you proposed to manage with the boats to prevent him boarding
you--that is why I was curious."

The suspicious ruffian took the bait as I meant he should; and putting
on an unconcerned manner, which fitted him as ill as the pilot jacket
which he had stolen from the captain he had murdered, and which he
was now wearing, inquired, "What I meant by that? If they left the
steward behind--not that they was goin' to, but to say it, for the sake
o' argyment--what would the management of the boats have to do with
preventin' him boardin' of them? He didn't understand."

"Oh, nothing," I replied with a shrug. "Since we are to take the
steward with us, there's an end of the matter."

"Can't you explain, sir?" he cried, striving to suppress his temper.

"It is not worth the trouble," said I; "because, don't you see, if even
you had made up your mind to leave the steward on the ship, you'd only
have one man to deal with. What put this matter into my head was a
yarn I read some time ago about a ship's company wishing to leave their
vessel. There were only two boats which were serviceable, and these
wouldn't hold above two-thirds of the crew. So the men conspired among
themselves--do you understand me?"

"Yes, yes, I'm a-followin' of you."

"That is, twelve men out of a crew composed of eighteen hands resolved
to lower the boats and get away, and leave the others to shift for
themselves. But they had to act cautiously, because, don't you see,
the fellows who were to be left behind would become desperate with the
fear of death, and if any of them contrived to get into the boats,
they might begin a fight, which, if it didn't capsize the boats, was
pretty sure to end in a drowning match. Of course, in our case, as I
have said, even supposing you _had_ made up your mind to leave the
steward behind, we should have nothing to fear, because he would be
only one man. But when you come to two or three, or four men driven mad
by terror, then look out if they get among you in a boat; for fear will
make two as strong as six, and I shouldn't like to be in the boat where
such a fight was taking place."

"Well, but how did them other chaps manage as you're tellin' about?"

"Why, they all got into the boats in a lump, and shoved off well clear
of the ship. The others jumped into the water after them, but never
reached the boats. But all this doesn't hit _our_ case. You wished me
to explain, and now you know my reasons for asking you how you meant
to manage with the boats. Do not forget that there is a woman among
us, and a fight at the last moment, when our lives may depend upon
orderliness and coolness, may drown us all."

And so saying I left him, under pretence of looking at the compass.




CHAPTER IX.


I had no reason to suppose that the hints I took care to wrap up in my
conversation with Stevens would shape his actions to the form I wished
them to take; but though they did no good, they would certainly do me
no harm, and it was at least certain that my opinion was respected, so
that I might hope that some weight would attach to whatever suggestions
I offered.

Nothing now remained to be done but to wait the result of events; but
no language can express an idea of my anxiety as the hours passed,
bringing us momentarily closer to the dreaded and yet wished-for issue.

Some of the men got intoxicated that afternoon, and I believe two of
them had a desperate set to; they sang until they were tired, and for
tea had more hot roast pork and fowls.

But the majority had their senses, and kept those who were drunk under;
so that the riot was all forward.

I wondered what the boatswain would think of the shindy over his head,
and whether he had a watch to tell the time by. His abode was surely a
very dismal one, among the coals in the forepeak, and dark as night,
with plenty of rats to squeak about his ears, and the endless creaking
and complaining of the timbers under water.

A terrible idea possessed me once. It was that he might be asleep when
the man went down to scuttle the ship, who, of course, would take a
candle with him, and find him lying there.

But there was no use in _imagining_ evil. I could only do what was
possible. If we were doomed to die, why, we must meet our fate
heroically. What more?

It blew freshly at eleven o'clock, and held all night. I kept all
the sail on the ship that she would bear, and up to noon next day we
spanked along at a great pace.

Then the wind fell light and veered round to the north; but this did
not matter to me, for I showed the carpenter a run on the chart which
convincingly proved to him that, even if we did no more than four
knots an hour until next day, we should be near enough to the coast of
Florida to heave to.

This afternoon the men made preparations to swing the long-boat over
the side, clapping on strops to the collar of the mainstay, and forward
round the tressel-tree, ready to hook on the tackles to lift the boat
out of her chocks. Their eagerness to get away from the ship was well
illustrated by these early preparations.

All that day they fared sumptuously on roast pork, and whatever took
their fancy among the cuddy stores, but drank little, or at all events
not enough to affect them, though there was sufficient rum in the hold
to kill them all off in a day, had they had a mind to broach the casks.

Towards evening we sighted no less than five ships, two standing to the
south and the others steering north. The spectacle of these vessels
fully persuaded Stevens that we were nearing the coast, he telling me
he had no doubt they were from the West Indies, which he supposed were
not more than four hundred miles distant.

I did not undeceive him.

I saw Miss Robertson for a few minutes that evening to repeat my
caution to her not to show herself on deck.

The men were again at their pranks in the forecastle, sky-larking
as they call it at sea, and, though not drunk, they were making a
tremendous noise. One of them had got a concertina, and sat playing
it, tailor-fashion, on top of the capstan, and some were dancing, two
having dressed themselves up as women in canvas bonnets, and blankets
round them to resemble skirts.

Fun of this sort would have been innocent enough had there been
any recognized discipline to overlook it; but from decent mirth to
boisterous, coarse disorder, is an easy step to sailors, and in the
present temper of the crew the least provocation might convert the ship
into a theatre for exhibitions of horse-play which, begun in vanity,
might end in criminal excesses.

During my brief conversation with Miss Robertson, I asked her an odd
question--Could she steer a ship?

She answered, "Yes."

"You say 'yes' because you will try if you are wanted to do so," I said.

"I say 'yes' because I really understand how to use the wheel," she
replied, seriously.

"Where did you learn?"

"During our voyage to the Cape of Good Hope. I used to watch the man
steering, and observe him move the wheel so as to keep the compass card
steady. I told Captain Jenkinson I should like to learn to steer, and
he would often let me hold the wheel, and for fun give me orders."

"Which way would you pull the spokes if I told you to put the helm to
starboard?"

"To the left," she answered, promptly.

"And if I said 'hard over?'"

"If the wind was blowing on the left hand side I would push the wheel
to the right until I could push it no further. You can't puzzle me,
indeed. I know all the steering terms. _Really_, I can steer."

I quite believed her, though I should never have dreamt of her
proficiency in this matter, and told her that if we succeeded in
getting away from the boats, she would be of the utmost importance to
us, because then there would be three men to work the ship, whereas two
only would be at liberty if one had to take the wheel.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now I come to Friday.

We were keeping no regular watches. Stevens, ever distrustful of
me, was markedly so now that our voyage was nearly ended. He was
incessantly up and down, looking at the compass, computing the ship's
speed by staring at the passing water, and often engaged, sometimes
on the poop, sometimes on the forecastle, in conversation with Fish,
Cornish, Johnson, and others.

He made no inquiries after Mr. or Miss Robertson; he appeared to have
forgotten their existence. I also noticed that he shirked me as often
as he could, leaving the deck when I appeared, and mounting the ladder
the furthest from where I stood when he came aft from the main-deck.

The dawn had broken with a promise of a beautiful day; though the
glass, which had been dropping very slowly all through the night,
stood low at eight o'clock that morning. The sun, even at that early
hour, was intensely hot, and here and there the pitch in the seams of
the deck adhered to the soles of one's boots, while the smell of the
paint-work rose hot in the nostrils.

There was a long swell, the undulations moderate though wide apart,
coming from the westward; the clouds were very high, and the sky a
dazzling blue, and the wind about north, very soft and refreshing.

The men were quiet, and continued so throughout the day. Many of
them, as well as the carpenter, incessantly gazed around the horizon,
evidently fearing the approach of a vessel; and some would steal aft
and look at the compass, and then go away again.

We were under all plain sail, and the ship, as near as I could tell,
was making about five knots an hour, though the log gave us seven, and
I logged it seven on the slate in case of any arguments arising.

When I came on deck with my sextant in hand to take sights, I was
struck by the intent expressions on the faces of the crew, the whole of
whom, even including the cook, had collected on the poop, or stood upon
the ladders waiting for me.

When I saw them thus congregated, my heart for a moment failed me.

The tremendous doubt crossed my mind--were they acquainted with the
ship's whereabouts? Did they know, had they known all through, that I
was deceiving them?

No!

As I looked at them I became reassured. Theirs was an anxiety I should
have been blind to misconstrue. The true expression on their faces
represented nothing but eager curiosity to know whether our journey
were really ended, or whether more time must elapse before they could
quit the ship which they had rendered accursed with the crime of
murder, and which as I well knew, from what Stevens had over and over
again let fall, they abhorred with all the terrors of vulgar conscience.

Having made my observations, I was about to quit the poop, when one of
the men called out--

"Tell us what you make it."

"I will when I have worked it out," I replied.

"Work it out here, whilst we looks on."

"Do any of you understand navigation?"

There was no reply.

"Unless you can count," said I, "you'll not be able to follow me."

"Two and two and one makes nine," said a voice.

"What do ye mean by jokin'? You ought to be ashamed o' yourself,"
exclaimed one of the men. And then there was a blow, and immediately
after an oath.

"If you want me to work out these sights in your presence, I'll do so,"
said I.

And I went below to get the things I required, leaving my sextant on
deck to show them that I meant to be honest.

When I returned, they were all around the skylight, gazing at the
sextant as though it were an animal; no man taking the liberty to touch
it, however.

They came, hustling each other about me as I sat on the skylight
working out my figures, and I promise you their proximity, coupled with
my notion that they _might_ suspect I had been deceiving them, did not
sharpen my wits so as to expedite my calculations.

I carried two reckonings in my head--false, and the true; and finding
our actual whereabouts to be ninety-eight miles from Bermuda, the
islands bearing W.S.W. as straight as a line, I unfolded the chart, and
giving them the imaginary longitude and latitude, put my finger upon
the spot we were supposed to have reached, exclaiming,

"Now you can see where we are!"

"Just make a small mark there with your pencil, will you?" said
Johnson; "then all hands can have a look."

I did so, and quitted the skylight, surrendering the chart to the men,
who made a strange picture as they stood poring over it, pointing with
their brown forefingers and arguing.

"There's no question I can answer, is there?" said I to the carpenter.

"Mates, is there anything you want to say to Mr. Royle?" he exclaimed.

"When are we going to heave the ship to?" asked Fish.

"That's for you to answer," I rejoined.

"Well, I'm not for standin' too close in shore," said Fish.

"How fur off do you say is this here Florida coast?" asked Johnson.

"About sixty miles. Look at the chart."

"And every minute brings us nearer," said a man.

"That's true," I replied. "But you don't want to leave the ship before
dusk, do you?"

The men looked at each other as though they were not sure that they
ought to confide so much to me as an answer to my question would
involve. I particularly took notice of this, and felt how thoroughly I
was put aside by them in their intentions.

The carpenter said, "You'll understand our arrangements by-and-by, Mr.
Royle. How's the wind?"

"About north," said I.

"Mates, shall we bring the yards to the masts and keep the leeches
liftin' till we're ready to stop her?"

"The best thing as can happen," said Johnson.

"She'll lie to the west'ards at that, and 'll look to be sailin'
properly if a wessel sights her; and she'll make no way neither," said
Stevens.

"You can't do better," I exclaimed.

So the helm was put down, and as the men went to work I descended to my
cabin.

The steward's head was at the pantry door, and I called to him, "Bring
me a biscuit and the sherry."

I wanted neither, but I had something to say to him; and if Stevens
saw him come to my cabin with a tray in his hand he was not likely to
follow and listen at the door.

The steward put the tray down and was going away, when I took him by
the arm and led him to the extremity of the cabin.

"Do you value your life?" I said to him in a whisper.

He stared at me and turned pale.

"Just listen," I continued. "At dusk this evening the men are going to
leave the ship in the boats. They are going to scuttle the ship first
that she may fill with water and sink. It is not their intention to
take us with them."

"My God!" he muttered, trembling like a freezing man: "are we to be
left on board to sink?"

"That is what they mean. But the bo'sun, whom they believe to be
drowned, is in the hold ready to kill the man who goes down to scuttle
the ship. If we act promptly we may save our lives and get away from
the ruffians. There are only three of us, but we must fight as though
we were twelve men if it should come to our having to fight. Understand
that. When once the men are in the boats no creature among them must
ever get on board again alive. Hit hard--spare nothing! If we are
beaten, we are dead men; if we conquer, our lives are our own."

"I'll do my best," answered the steward, the expression on whose face,
however, was anything but heroical. "But you must tell me what to do,
sir. I shan't know, sir. I never was in a fight, and the sight of blood
is terrifying to me, sir."

"You'll have to bottle up your fears. Don't misunderstand me, steward.
Every man left on board this ship to drown will look to his companions
to help him to save his life. And by all that's holy, if you show any
cowardice, if you skulk, if you do not fight like forty men, if you do
not stick by my side and obey my words like a flash of lightning, as
sure as you breathe I'll put a bullet through your head. I'll kill you
for not helping me."

And I pulled out the pistol from my pocket and flourished it under his
nose.

He recoiled from the weapon with his eyes half out of his head, and
gasped--

"What am I to use, sir?"

"The first iron belaying-pin you can snatch up," I answered. "There
are plenty to be found. And now be off. Not a look, not a word! Go to
your work as usual. If you open your mouth you are a dead man."

He went away as pale as a ghost. However, cur as he was, I did not
despair of his turning to at the last moment. Cowards will sometimes
make terrible antagonists. The madness of fear renders them desperate,
and in their frenzy they will do more execution than the brave
deliberate man.

I did not remain long off the poop, being too anxious to observe the
movements of the crew.

I found the breeze slackening fast, with every appearance of a calm
in the hot, misty blue sky, and the glassy aspect of the horizon. The
lower sails flapped to every motion of the ship, and lying close to
what little wind there was, we made no progress at all.

The promise of a calm, though favourable to the intentions of the men,
in so far as it would keep the horizon clear of sailing ships, and so
limit the probability of their operations being witnessed to the chance
of a steamer passing, was a blow to me; as one essential part of my
scheme, that of swinging the mainyards round, and getting way on the
ship, when the men had left her, would be impracticable.

The glass, indeed, stood low, but then this might betoken the coming
of more wind than I should want, a gale that would detain the men on
the ship, and force them to defer the scheme of abandoning her for an
indefinite period.

They had gone to dinner, but were so quiet that the vessel seemed
deserted, and nothing was audible but the clank of the tiller-chains
and the rattling of the sails against the masts.

Stevens was forward, apparently having his dinner with the men. In
glancing through the skylight, I saw Mary Robertson looking up at me.
I leaned forward, so that my face was concealed from the man at the
wheel--the only person on deck besides myself--and whispered--

"Keep up your courage, and be ready to act as I may direct."

"I am quite ready," she answered.

"Remain in your cabin," I said, "and don't let the men see you;" for it
had flashed upon me that if the crew saw her they might force her to go
along with them in the boats.

"I wanted a little brandy for papa," she answered. "He is very poorly
and weak, and rambles terribly in his talk."

She turned to hide her tears from me, and prevent me witnessing her
struggles to restrain them. She would feel their impotence, the mockery
of them at such a time; besides, dear heart, she would think I should
distrust her courage if she let me see her weep.

The steward came forward under the skylight as she entered her cabin,
and said--

"I will fight for my life, sir."

"That is my advice to you."

"I will do my best. I have been thinking of my wife and child, sir."

"Hush!" I cried. "Not so loud. If your courage fails you, there is a
girl in that cabin there, who will show you how to be brave. Remember
two things--act quickly and strike hard; and for God's sake don't fall
to drinking to pull up your nerves. If I find you drunk I will call
upon the men to drown you."

And with this injunction I left the skylight.

The men remained a great while in the forecastle, all so quiet that
I wondered whether some among them were even now below scuttling the
ship. But they would hardly act so prematurely. To be sure, it would
take a long time for the ship to fill, bored even in half a dozen
places by an auger; but until the evening fell, and they were actually
in the boats, they could not be sure that a wind would not spring up to
oblige them to keep to the ship.

I remained on deck, never thinking of dinner, watching the weather
anxiously.

An ordinary seaman came aft to relieve the wheel; but finding that the
ship had no steerage way on her, he squatted himself on the taffrail,
pulled out a pipe and began to smoke. I took no notice of him.

Shortly afterwards Stevens came along the main-deck and mounted the
poop.

"A dead calm," said he, after sweeping the horizon with his hand over
his eyes, "and blessedly hot."

"Is the ship to be left all standing?" I inquired.

"What do you think?" he replied, with an air of indifference, casting
his eyes aloft.

"I should snug her, certainly."

"Why?" he demanded, folding his arms, and staring at me as he leaned
against the poop-rail.

"Because, should she drift, and be overhauled by another ship, it will
look more ship-shape if she is found snug, as though she had been
abandoned in a storm."

"There's something in that," he answered, without shifting his position.

"Shall I tell the men to shorten sail?"

"If you like," he replied, grinning in my face.

I pretended not to observe his odd manner, being very anxious to get in
all the sail that I could whilst there were men to do it. So I sang
out, "All hands shorten sail!"

The men on the forecastle stared, and burst into a laugh; and one of
a group on the main-deck, who were inspecting the provisions for the
long-boat, which lay under a tarpaulin, exclaimed--

"Wot's goin' to happen?"

I glanced at the carpenter, who still surveyed me with a broad grin,
and walked aft. I was a fool not to have anticipated this. What was it
to the crew whether the ship sank with all sails standing or with all
sails furled?

I was too restless to go below; but to dissemble my terrible anxiety
as well as I could, I lighted a pipe and crouched in the shadow of the
mizzen-mast out of the way of the broiling sun.

The breeze had utterly gone. The sea was glassy, and white and long
wreaths of mist stood, down in the south, upon the horizon. As I looked
at the ship, at her graceful spaces of canvas lowering upon the fine
and delicate masts, her white decks, her gleaming brass-work, the
significance of the crime meditated by the crew was shocking to me.
The awful cold-bloodedness with which they meant to sink the beautiful
vessel, with the few poor lives who were to be left defenceless on
board, overwhelmed me with horror and detestation. So atrocious an act
I thought the Almighty would not surely permit. Could not I count upon
His mercy and protection? Remembering that I had not sought Him yet,
I pulled off my cap, and without kneeling--for I durst not kneel with
the eyes of the men upon me--I mutely invoked His heavenly protection.
I pleaded with all the strength of my heart for the sweet and helpless
girl whom, under His divine providence, I had already rescued from one
dreadful fate, and whom, under His sure guidance, I might yet preserve
from the slow and bitter death which the crew had planned that we
should suffer.

It was not until six o'clock that the carpenter ordered the men to get
the long-boat over. But just before he called out I had noticed, with
a leap of joy in me, that the water out in the north-west was dark as
with the shadow of a cloud upon it.

Though this was no more than a cat's paw, and travelled very slowly, I
was certain, not only from the indications of the barometer, but from
the complexion of the sky, that wind was behind.

The men did not appear to notice it, and when the carpenter sang out
the order all hands went to work briskly.

Some ran aloft with tackles, which they made fast to the starboard
fore and main yard-arms; others hooked on tackles to the straps which
were already round the tressel-tree and collar of the mainstay. But
willingly as they worked, even these preliminary measures ran into a
great deal of time, and before they had done, a light breeze had come
down on the ship and taken her aback.

The carpenter, seeing this, clapped some hands on to the fore and
mizzen braces, and filled the fore and after sails. The ship was
therefore hove to with her head at west.

This done, he went to the wheel, put the helm amidship and made it
fast; and then went forward again to superintend the work.

I took up my position on the starboard side of the poop, close against
the ladder, and there I remained. I scanned the faces of the men
carefully, and found all hands present, including the cook. I thus
knew that no man was below in the hold, and it was now my business to
watch closely that I might miss the man who should have the job to
scuttle the ship.

The breeze died away, but in the same direction whence it had come was
another shadow, more defined and extending far to the north.

The men had begun their work late, and as they knew that they had
little or no twilight to count upon, laboured hard at the difficult
task of raising the long-boat out of her chucks and swinging her clear
of the bulwarks.

It was close upon seven o'clock before they were ready to hoist. They
took the end of one fall to the capstan on the main-deck, the other
they led forward through a block, and presently up rose the boat until
it was on a level with the bulwarks. Then the yard-arm tackles were
manned, the midship falls slacked off, and the big boat sank gently
down into the water.

She was brought alongside at once, and three men jumped into her. Then
began the process of storing the provisions. This was carried on by
five men, while the remaining three came aft, and whilst one got into
the quarter-boat, the other two lowered her.

_At this moment I missed the carpenter._

I held my breath, looking into the boats and all round.

He was not to be seen.

I strained my ear at the foremost skylight, conceiving that he might
have entered the cuddy.

All was silent there.

Beyond the shadow of a doubt, he it was who had planned the scuttling
of the ship, and he it was who had left the deck to do it.

It was a supreme moment. I had not contemplated that _he_ would be the
man who should bore the hole. If the boatswain killed him----!

Great God! the hands were on deck--all about us! If he did not return,
they would seek him. He was their leader, and they were not likely to
quit the ship without him.

The hair stirred on my head; the sweat stood in beads on my face. I bit
my lip half through to control my features, and stood waiting for--I
knew not what!




CHAPTER X.


The men went on busily provisioning the long-boat, some whistling gay
tunes, others laughing and passing jokes, all in good spirits, as
though they were going on a holiday expedition.

The shadow on the horizon was broadening fast, and the sun was sinking
quickly, making the ocean blood-red with its burning effulgence, and
veining the well-greased masts with lines of fire.

What had happened?

Even now, as I thought, was the villain lying dead, with the auger in
his hand?

The minutes rolling past seemed eternal. Five, ten, twenty minutes
came and went. The sun's lower limb was close against the water-line,
sipping the ruby splendour it had kindled. The breeze was now close
at hand, but we still lay in a breathless calm, and the sails flapped
softly to the tuneful motion of the deep.

Then some of the men who remained on deck went over the ship's side,
leaving four of the crew on the main-deck close against the gangway.
These men sometimes looked at me, sometimes into the cuddy, sometimes
forward, but none of them spoke.

Now the sun was half hidden, and the soft breeze blowing upon the
sails, outlined the masts against those which were backed.

Suddenly--and I started as though I had beheld a ghost--the carpenter
came round from before the galley, and walked quickly to the gangway.

"Over with you, lads!" he cried.

Like rats leaping from a sinking hull they dropped, one after the
other, into the long-boat, the carpenter going last. Their painter was
fast to a chain-plate, and they cast it adrift. The quarter-boat was in
tow, and in a few minutes both boats stood at some two or three cables'
lengths from the ship, the men watching her.

The last glorious fragment of the sinking sun fled, and darkness came
creeping swiftly over the sea.

I had stood like one in whom life had suddenly been extinguished--too
much amazed to act. Seeing the carpenter return, I had made sure that
he had killed the boatswain; but his behaviour contradicted this
supposition. Had he been attacked by the boatswain and killed him,
would he have quitted the ship without revenging himself upon me, whom
he would know to be at the bottom of this conspiracy against his life?

What, then, was the meaning of his return, his collected manner, his
silent exit from the ship? Had the boatswain, lying hidden, _died_?
The thought fired my blood. Yes, I believed that he had died--that the
carpenter had performed his task unmolested without perceiving the
corpse--and that, whilst I stood there, the water was rushing into the
ship's hold!

I flung myself off the poop, and bounded forward. In the briefest
possible time I was peering down the forescuttle.

"Below there!" I called.

There was no answer.

"Below there, I say, boatswain!"

My cry was succeeded by a hollow, thumping sound.

"Below there!" I shouted, for the third time.

I heard the sounds of a foot treading on something that crunched under
the tread.

"I am Mr. Royle. Bo'sun, are you below? For God Almighty's sake answer
and let me know that you are living."

"Have the skunks cleared out?" responded a voice, and, stumbling as he
moved, the boatswain came under the forescuttle and turned up his face.

"What have you done?" I cried, almost delirious.

"Why, plugged up two on 'em. There's only one more," he answered.

"One more what?"

"Leaks--holes--whatever you call 'em."

So saying, he shouldered his way back into the gloom.

It was now all as clear as daylight to me. I waited some minutes,
bursting with impatience and anxiety, during which I heard him
hammering away like a caulker. My fear was that the men would discover
that they had omitted to put a compass in the boats, and that they
would return for one. There were other things, too, of which they might
perceive the omission, and row to the ship to obtain them before she
sank.

Just as I was about to cry out to him to bear a hand, the boatswain's
face gleamed under the hatchway.

"Have you done?" I exclaimed.

"Ay, ay."

"Is she tight?"

"Tight as a cocoa-nut."

"Up with you, then! There is a bit of a breeze blowing. Let us swing
the mainyards and get way upon the ship. They are waiting to see her
settle before they up sail. It is dark enough to act. Hurrah, now!"

He came up through the forecastle and followed me on to the main-deck.

Though not yet dark, the shadow of the evening made it difficult to
distinguish faces even a short distance off. There was a pretty little
wind up aloft rounding the royals and top-gallant sails, and flattening
the sails on the mainyards well against the masts.

I stopped a second to look over the bulwarks, and found that the boats
still remained at about three cable-lengths from the ship. They had
slipped the mast in the long-boat; but I noticed that the two boats
lay side by side, four men in the quarter-boat, and the rest in the
long-boat, and that they were handing out some of the stores which had
been stowed in the quarter-boat, to lighten her.

"We must lose no time, Mr. Royle," exclaimed the boatswain. "How many
hands can we muster?"

"Three."

"That'll do. We can swing the mainyard. Who's the third?--the steward?
Let's have him out."

I ran to the cuddy and called the steward. He came out of the pantry.

"On to the poop with you!" I cried. "Right aft you'll find the bo'sun
there. Miss Robertson!"

At the sound of her name she stepped forth from her cabin.

"The men are out of the ship," I exclaimed. "We are ready to get way
upon her. Will you take the wheel at once?"

She was running on to the poop before the request was well out of my
mouth.

The boatswain had already let go the starboard main-braces; and as I
rushed aft he and the steward were hauling to leeward. I threw the
whole weight of my body on the brace, and pulled with the strength of
two men.

"Put the wheel to starboard!" I called out; and the girl, having cast
off the lashing with marvellous quickness, ran the spokes over.

"By God, she's a wonder!" cried the boatswain, looking at her.

And so was he. The muscles on his bare arms stood up like lumps of iron
under the flesh as he strained the heavy brace.

The great yards swung easily; the topsail, top-gallant, and royal yards
came round with the mainyard, and swung themselves when the sails
filled.

There was no time to gather in the slack of the lee-braces. I ran to
windward, belayed the braces, and raised a loud cry.

"They're after us, bo'sun!--they're after us!"

We might have been sure of that; for if we had not been able to
see them we could have heard them: the grinding of the oars in the
rowlocks, the frothing of the water at the boat's bows, the cries and
oaths of the men in the long-boat, inciting the others to overtake us.

Only the quarter-boat was in pursuit as yet; but in the long-boat they
were rigging up the stun'-sail they had shipped, meaning, as they were
to windward, to bear down upon us.

There was no doubt that they guessed their scheme had been baffled by
discerning _three_ men on deck. The carpenter at least knew that old
Mr. Robertson was too ill to leave his cabin, and failing _him_ he
would instantly perceive that a trick had been played; and though he
could not tell in that light and at that distance who the third man
was, he would certainly know that this third man's presence on board
implied the existence of a plot to save the ship.

As the boat approached I perceived that she was rowed by four men and
steered by a fifth, and presently, hearing his voice, I understood that
this man steering was Stevens.

The ship had just got way enough upon her to answer her helm. Already
we were drawing the long-boat away from our beam on to the quarter.

I shouted to Miss Robertson "Steady! keep her straight as she is!" for
even now we had brought the wind too far aft for the trim of the yards.

"Steward," I cried, "whip out one of those iron belaying-pins, and
stand by to hammer away."

We then posted ourselves, the boatswain and the steward at the gangway,
and I half-way up the poop ladder, each with a heavy belaying-pin
in his hand, ready to receive the scoundrels who were making for the
starboard main-chains.

The boat, urged furiously through the water, came up to us hand over
fist, the carpenter cursing us furiously, and swearing that he would do
for us yet.

I got my pistol ready, meaning to shoot the ruffian the moment he
should be within reach of the weapon, but abandoned this intention from
a motive of hate and revenge. I knew if I killed him as he sat there in
the stern sheets, that the others would take fright and run away; and
such was my passion, and the sense of our superiority over them from
our position in the ship as against theirs in the boat, that I made up
my mind to let them come alongside and get into the chains, so that we
might kill them all as a warning to the occupants of the long-boat, who
were now coming down upon us before the breeze.

I took one glance at Miss Robertson: her figure was visible by the side
of the wheel. She was steering as steadily as any sailor, and, with an
emotion of gratitude to God for giving us such help, and her so much
courage at this supreme moment, I addressed all my energies to the
bloody work before me.

The boat dashed alongside, and the men threw in their oars. The fellow
in the bow grabbed hold of one of the chain-plates, passed the boat's
painter around it, hauled it short and made it fast with incredible
activity and speed. Then pulling their knives out of the sheaths they
all came clambering into the main-chains.

So close as they now were, I could make out the faces of the men. One
was big Johnson, another Cornish, the third Fish, the fourth, Schmidten.

I alone was visible. The boatswain and the steward stood with uplifted
arms ready to strike at the first head that showed itself.

The carpenter sprang on to the bulwark just where I stood. He poised
his knife to stab me under the throat.

"Now, you murderous treacherous ruffian!" I cried at the top of my
voice, "say your prayers!"

I levelled the pistol at his head, the muzzle not being a yard away
from his face, and pulled the trigger. The bright flash illuminated him
like a ray of lightning. He uttered a scream shrill as a child's, but
terrific in intensity, clapped his hands to his face, and fell like a
stone into the main-chains.

"It is your turn now!" I roared to Johnson, and let fly at him. He was
holding on to one of the main shrouds in the act of springing on to
the deck. I missed his head, but struck him in the arm, I think; for
he let go the shroud with a deep groan, reeled backwards, and toppled
overboard, and I heard the heavy splash of his body as he fell.

But we were not even now three to three, but three to one; for the
boatswain had let drive with his frightful belaying-pin at Fish's head,
just as that enormous protuberance had shown itself over the bulwark,
and the wretch lay dead or stunned in the boat alongside; whilst the
steward, who had secreted a huge carving-knife in his bosom, had
stabbed the Dutchman right in the stomach, leaving the knife in him;
and the miserable creature hung over the bulwark, head and arms hanging
down towards the water, and suddenly writhing as he thus hung, dropped
overboard.

Cornish, of all five men alone lived. I had watched him aim a blow at
the boatswain's back, and fired, but missed him. But he too had missed
his aim, and the boatswain, slueing round, struck his wrist with the
belaying-pin--whack! it sounded like the blow of a hammer on wood--and
the knife fell from his hand.

"Mercy! spare my life!" he roared, seeing that I had again covered him,
having two more shots left.

The steward, capable, now that things had gone well with us, of
performing prodigies of valour, rushed upon him, laid hold of his legs,
and pulled him off the bulwark on to the deck.

I thought the fall had broken his back, for he lay groaning and
motionless.

"Don't kill him," I cried. "Make his hands fast and leave him for the
present. We may want him by-and-by."

The boatswain whipped a rope's end round him and shoved him against the
rail, and then came running up the poop ladder, wiping the streaming
perspiration from his face.

The breeze was freshening, and the boat alongside wobbled and splashed
as the ship towed her through the water.

I ran aft and stared into the gloom astern. I could see nothing of the
long-boat. I looked again and again, and fetched the night-glass, and
by its aid, sure enough, I beheld her, a smudge on the even ground of
the gloom, standing away close to the wind, for this much I could tell
by the outline of her sail.

"Miss Robertson!" I cried, "we are saved! Yonder is the long-boat
leaving us. Our lives are our own!"

"I bless God for His mercy," she answered quietly. But then her pent-up
feelings mastered her; she rocked to and fro, grasping the spokes
of the wheel, and I extended my arms just in time to save her from
falling.

"Bo'sun!" I shouted, and he came hurrying to me. "Miss Robertson has
fainted! Reach me a flag out of that locker."

He handed me a signal-flag, and I laid the poor girl gently down upon
the deck with the flag for a pillow under her head.

"Fetch me some brandy, bo'sun. The steward will give you a wine-glass
full."

And with one hand upon the wheel to steady the ship, I knelt by the
girl's side, holding her cold fingers, with so much tenderness and love
for her in my heart, that I could have wept like a woman to see her
lying so pale and still.

The boatswain returned quickly, followed by the steward. I surrendered
the wheel to the former, and taking the brandy, succeeded in
introducing some into her mouth. By dint of this and chafing her hands
and moistening her forehead, I restored her to consciousness. I then,
with my arm supporting her, helped her into the cuddy; but I did not
stay an instant after this, for there was plenty of work to be done on
deck; and though we had escaped one peril, yet here we might be running
headlong into another, for the ship was under full sail; we had but
three men to work her, not counting Cornish, of whose willingness or
capacity to work after his rough handling I as yet knew nothing. The
glass stood low, and if a gale should spring up and catch us as we
were, it was fifty to one if the ship did not go to the bottom.

"Bo'sun," I exclaimed, "what's to be done now?"

"Shorten sail whilst the wind's light, that's sartin," he answered.
"But the first job must be to get Cornish out of his lashin's and set
him on his legs. He must lend us a hand."

"Yes; we'll do that," I replied. "Steward, can you steer?"

"No, sir," responded the steward.

"Oh, damn it!" exclaimed the boatswain. "I'd rather be a guffy than a
steward," meaning by guffy a marine.

"Well," cried I, "you must try."

"But I know nothing about it, sir."

"Come here and lay hold of these spokes. Look at that card--no, by
Jove! you can't see it."

But the binnacle lamp was trimmed, and in a moment the boatswain
had pulled out a lucifer match, dexterously caught the flame in his
hollowed hands and fired the mesh.

"Look at that card," I said, as the boatswain shipped the lamp.

"I'm a lookin', sir."

"Do you see that it points south-east?"

"Yes, sir."

"If those letters S.E. swing to the left of the lubber's point--that
black mark there--pull the spokes to the left until S.E. comes to the
mark again. If S.E. goes to the right, shove the spokes to the right.
Do you understand?"

"Yes, I think I do, sir."

"Mind your eye, steward. Don't let those letters get away from you, or
you'll run the ship into the long-boat, and bring all hands on board
again."

And leaving him holding on to the wheel with the fear, and in the
attitude of a cockney clinging for his life, the boatswain and I walked
to the main-deck.

Cornish lay like a bundle against the rail. When he saw us he cried
out--

"Kill me if you like; but for God's sake loosen this rope first! It's
keepin' my blood all in one place!"

"How do you know we haven't come to drown you?" cried the boatswain in
an awful voice. "Don't jaw us about your blood. You won't want none in
five minutes."

"Then the Lord have mercy upon my soul!" groaned the poor wretch, and
let drop his head which he had lifted out of the scuppers to address us.

"Drownin's too easy for the likes o' you," continued the boatswain.
"You want whippin' and picklin', and then quarterin' arterwards."

"We are willing to spare your life," said I, feeling that we had no
time to waste, "if you will give us your word to help us to work this
ship, and bring her into port if we get no assistance on the road."

"I'll do anything if you'll spare my life," moaned he, "and loose this
rope round my middle."

"Do you think he's to be trusted, Mr. Royle?" said the boatswain, in
a stern voice, playing a part. "There's a bloodthirsty look on his
countinunce, and his eyes are full o' murder."

"Only try me!" groaned Cornish, faintly.

"He wur Stevens' chief mate," continued the boatswain; "an' I think it
'ud be wiser to leave him as he is for a few hours whilst we consider
the adwisability of trustin' of him."

"Then I shall be cut in halves," moaned Cornish.

"Well," I exclaimed, pretending first to reflect, "we will try you; and
if you act honestly by us you shall have no cause to complain. But if
you attempt to play false, we will treat you as you deserve; we will
shoot you as we shot your mates, and pitch your body overboard. So
you'll know what to expect. Bos'un, cast him adrift."

He was speedily liberated, and the boatswain hoisted him on to his
feet, when finding him very shaky, I fetched a glass of rum from the
pantry, which he swallowed.

"Thank you, sir," said he, rubbing his wrist, which the boatswain had
struck during the conflict. "I'll be honest and do what I can. You may
trust me to work for you. This here mutiny belonged to all hands, and
was no one man's, unless it were Stevens'; and I'd rather be here than
in the long-boat."

"Bo'sun," said I, cutting the fellow short, "the carpenter made the
port quarter-boat useless by knocking some planks out of her. We ought
to get the boat alongside in board while the water's smooth--we may
want her."

"Right you are, Mr. Royle," said he. "Pay us out a rope's end, will
you, and I'll drop her under the davits?"

And, active as a cat, he scrambled into the main-chains.

But on a sudden I heard a heavy splash.

"My God!" I cried "he's fallen overboard!" And I was rushing towards
the poop when I heard him sing out, "Hallo! here's another!" and this
was followed by a second splash.

I got on to the bulwarks and bawled to him, "Where are you? What are
you doing? Are you bathing?"

"The deuce a bit," he answered. "It was one o' them blessed mutineers
in the main-chains, and here was another in the boat. I pitched 'em
into the water. Now then, slacken gently, and belay when I sing out."

In a few moments the boat was under the davits and both falls hooked
on. Then up came the boatswain, and the three of us began to hoist,
manning first one fall, and then the other, bit by bit, until the boat
was up; but she was a heavy load, with her freight of provisions and
water--too precious to us to lose--and we panted, I promise you, by the
time she was abreast of the poop rail.

"Mr. Bo'sun," said Cornish, suddenly, "beggin' your pardon--I thought
you was dead."

"Did you, Jim Cornish?"

"I thought you was drownded, sir."

"Well, I ain't the fust drownded man as has come to life agin."

"All hands, Mr. Bo'sun, thought you was overboard, lyin' drownded. You
_was_ overboard?"

"And do you think I'm going to explain?" answered the boatswain,
contemptuously.

"It terrified me to see you, sir."

"Well, perhaps I ain't real arter all. How do you know? Seein' ain't
believin', so old women say."

"I don't believe in ghosts; but I thought you was one, Mr. Bo'sun, and
so did big Johnson when he swore you was one of the three at the port
main-braces."

"Well, I ain't ashamed o' bein' a shadder. Better men nor me have been
shadders. I knew a ship-chandler as wos a churchwarden and worth a mint
o' money, who became a shadder, and kept his wife from marryin' William
Soaper, o' the Coopid public-house Love Lane, Shadwell High Street, by
standin' at the foot of her bed every night at eight bells. He had a
cast in wun eye, Mr. Royle, and that's how his wife knew him."

"Well, I'll say no more--but my hair riz when you turned an' hit me
over the arm. I thought you couldn't be substantial like."

"'Cause you didn't get enough o' my belaying-pin," rejoined the
boatswain, with a loud laugh. "Wait till you turn dusty agin, mate, and
then you'll see wot a real ghost can do."

Just then Miss Robertson emerged from the companion. I ran to her and
entreated her to remain below--though for an hour only.

"No, no," she answered, "let me help you. I am much better--I am quite
well now. I can steer the ship while you take in some of the sails, for
I know there are too many sails set if wind should come."

Then, seeing Cornish, she started and held my arm, whispering, "Who is
he? Have they come on board?"

I briefly explained, and then renewed my entreaties that she should
remain in her cabin; but she said she would not leave the deck, even if
I refused her permission to steer, and pleaded so eloquently, holding
my arm and raising her sweet eyes to my face, that I reluctantly gave
way.

She hastened eagerly to take the steward's place, and I never saw any
man resign a responsible position more willingly than he.

I now explained to the boatswain that the glass stood very low, and
that we must at once turn to and get in all the sail we could hand.

I asked Cornish if he thought he was able to go aloft, and on his
answering in the affirmative, first testing the strength of his wrist
by hanging with his whole weight to one of the rattlins on the mizzen
rigging, we went to work to clew up the three royals.

I knew that the steward was of no use aloft, and never even asked him
if he would venture his hand at it, for I was pretty sure he would lose
his head and tumble overboard before he had mounted twenty feet, and
he was too useful to us to lose right off in that way.

Cornish went up to stow the mizzen-royal, and the boatswain and I went
aloft to the main-royal. The breeze was still very gentle and the ship
slipping smoothly through the black space of sea; but when we were on
the main-royal yard I called the attention of the boatswain to the
appearance of the sky in the north-west, for it was lightning faintly
in that direction, and the pale illumination sufficed to expose a huge
bank of cloud stretching far to the north.

"We shall be able to get the top-gallant sails off her," he said, "and
the jibs and staysails. But I don't know how we're going to furl the
mainsail, and it'll take us all night to reef the topsails."

"We must work all night," I answered, "and do what we can. Just tell
me, whilst I pass this gasket, how you managed in the hold."

"Why," he answered, "you know I took a kind o' crow-bar down with me,
and I reckoned on splittin' open the head of the fust chap as should
drop through the forescuttle. But turnin' it over in my mind, I thought
it 'ud be dangerous to kill the feller, as his mates might take it into
their heads to wait for him. And so I determined to hide myself when I
heerd the cove comin', and stand by to plug up the holes arter he wur
gone."

Here he discharged some tobacco-juice from his mouth, and dried his
lips on the sail.

"Werry well; I had my knife with me an' a box o' matches, and werry
useful they wos. I made a bit of a flare by combing out a strand of
yarns and settin' fire to it, and found wot was more pleasin' to my eye
than had I come across a five-pun note--I mean a spare broom-stick,
which I found knockin' about in the coal-hole; and I cut it into
pieces and pointed 'em ready to sarve. I knew who ever 'ud come, would
use an auger, and know'd the size hole it 'ud cut; and by-and-by, but
the Lord knows how long it were afore it happened, I hears some one
drop down the forescuttle and strike a match and light a bit o' candle
end. I got behind the bulkhead, where there was a plank out, and I see
the carpenter wurking away with his auger, blowin' and sweatin' like
any respectable hartizan earnin' of honest wages. By-and-by the water
comes rushin' in; and then he bores another hole and the water comes
through that; and then he bores another hole, arter which he blows out
his candle and goes away, scramblin' up on deck. My fingers quivered to
give him one for hisself with the end o' my crow-bar over the back of
his head. However, no sooner did he clear out than I struck a match,
fits in the bits of broom-stick, and stops the leaks as neatly as he
made 'em. I thought they'd hear me drivin' of them plugs in, and that
was all I was afraid of. But the ship's none the worse for them holes.
She's as tight as ever she wos: an' I reckon' if she gets no more water
in her than 'll come through them plugs, she won't be in a hurry to
sink."

I laughed, and we shook hands heartily.

I often think over that: the immense height we looked down from; the
mystical extent of black water mingling with the far-off sky; the faint
play of lightning on the horizon; the dark hull of the ship far below,
with the dim radiance of the cuddy lamps upon the skylights; the brave,
sweet girl steering us, and we two perched on a dizzy eminence, shaking
hands!




CHAPTER XI.


Cornish had stowed the mizzen-royal by the time we had reached the
deck, and when he joined us we clewed up the fore top-gallant sail, so
that we might hand that sail when we had done with the royal.

I found this man quite civil and very willing, and in my opinion he
spoke honestly when he declared that he had rather be with us than in
the long-boat.

The lightning was growing more vivid upon the horizon; that is, when
I looked in that direction from the towering height of the fore-royal
yard; and it jagged and scored with blue lines the great volume and
belt of cloud that hung to the sea. The wind had slightly freshened,
but still it remained a very gentle breeze, and urged the ship
noiselessly through the water.

The stars were few and languishing as you may sometimes have seen them
on a summer's night in England when the air is sultry and the night
dull and thunderous. All the horizon round was lost in gloom, save
where the lightning threw out at swift intervals the black water-line
against the gleaming background of cloud.

When we again reached the deck we were rather scant of breath, and I,
being unused of late to this kind of exercise, felt the effects of it
more than the others.

However, if it was going to blow a gale of wind as the glass
threatened, it was very advisable that we should shorten sail now that
it was calm; for assuredly three men, even though working for their
lives as we were, would be utterly useless up aloft when once the
weather got bad.

We went into the cuddy and took all three of us a sup of rum to give us
life, and I then said, "Shall we turn to and snug away aft since we are
here?"

They agreed; so we went on the poop and let go the mizzen top-gallant
and topsail halliards, roused out the reef-tackles, and went aloft,
where we first stowed the top-gallant sail, and then got down upon the
topsail-yard.

It was a hard job tying in all three reefs, passing the earrings and
hauling the reef-bands taut along the yard; but we managed to complete
the job in about half an hour.

Miss Robertson remained at the wheel all this time, and the steward was
useful on deck to let go any ropes which we found fast.

"It pains me," I said to the girl, "to see you standing here. I know
you are worn out, and I feel to be acting a most unmanly part in
allowing you to have your way."

"You cannot do without me. Why do you want to make your crew smaller in
number than it is?" she answered, smiling with the light reflected from
the compass card upon her face. "Look at the lightning over there! I'm
sailor enough to know that our masts would be broken if the wind struck
the ship with all this sail upon her. And what is _my_ work--idly
standing here--compared to yours--you, who have already done so much,
and are still doing the work of many men?"

"You argue too well for my wishes. I want you to agree with me."

"Whom have you to take my place here?"

"Only the steward."

"He cannot steer, Mr. Royle; and I assure you the ship wants watching."

I laughed at this nautical language in her sweet mouth, and said--

"Well, you shall remain here a little while longer."

"One thing," she exclaimed, "I will ask you to do--to look into our
cabin and see if papa wants anything."

I ran below and peeped into the cabin. She had already lighted the lamp
belonging to it, and so I was able to see that the old gentleman was
asleep. I procured some brandy-and-water and biscuit and also a chair,
and returned on deck.

"Your father is asleep," said I, "so you may make your mind easy
about him. Here are some refreshments--and see, if I put this chair
here you can sit and hold the wheel steady with one hand. There is no
occasion to remain on your feet. Keep that star yonder--right over
the yard-arm," pointing it out to her. "That is as good a guide as the
compass for the time being. We need only keep the sails full. I can
shape no course as yet, though we shall haul round the moment we have
stripped more canvas off her."

I now heard the voices of Cornish and the boatswain right away far out
in the darkness ahead, and running forward on to the forecastle, I
found them stowing the flying jib.

To save time I let go the outer and inner jib-halliards, and, with
the assistance of the steward, hauled these sails down. He and I also
clewed up the main top-gallant-sail, took the main tack and sheet to
the winch and got them up, rounded up the leechlines and buntlines as
well as we could, and then belayed and went forward again. I let go the
fore-topsail halliards and took the ends of the reef-tackles to the
capstan, and whilst the two others were tackling the outer jib, the
steward and I hauled down the main-topmast staysail, and snugged it as
best we could in the netting.

These tasks achieved, I got upon the bowsprit, and gave the two men a
hand to stow the jibs.

"Now mates," I cried, "let's get upon the fore-topsail yard and see
what we can do there."

And up we went, and in three quarters of an hour, with the help of
a jigger, we had hauled out the earrings and tied every blessed
reef-point in the sail.

But this was the finishing touch to our strength, and Cornish was so
exhausted that I had to help him over the top down the fore rigging.

We had indeed accomplished wonders: close-reefed two of the three
topsails, stowed the three jibs, the three royals, two top-gallant
sails and staysails. Our work was rendered three times harder than it
need have been by the darkness; we had to fumble and grope, and, by
being scarcely able to see each other, we found it extremely difficult
to work in unison; so that, instead of hauling altogether, we hauled
at odd times, and rendered our individual strength ineffectual, when,
could we have collectively exerted it, we should have achieved our
purpose easily.

"I must sit down for a spell, sir," said Cornish. "I can't do no more
work yet."

"If we could only get that top-gallant sail off her," I exclaimed,
looking longingly up at it. But all the same, I felt that a whole
regiment of bayonets astern of me could not have urged me one inch up
the shrouds.

We dragged our weary limbs aft and squatted ourselves near the wheel, I
for one being scarcely able to stand.

"Mr. Royle," said Miss Robertson, "will you and the others go down into
the cabin and get some sleep? I will keep watch, and promise faithfully
to wake you the moment I think necessary."

"Bo'sun," I exclaimed, "do you hear that? Miss Robertson wants us to
turn in. She will keep watch, she says, and call us if a gale comes!"

"God bless her!" said the boatswain. "I called her a wonder just now,
and I'll call her a wonder again. So she is! and though she hears me
speak, and may think me wantin' in good manners, I'll say this--an'
tired as I am I'd fight the man now as he stood who'd contradict
me--that she's just one o' the best--mind, Jim, I say the best--o' the
werry properest kind o' gals as God Almighty ever made, a regular real
woman to the eye, and a sailor in her heart. And by the livin' Moses,
Jim, if you can tell me now to my face that you would ha' let her sink
in this here wessel, I'll chuck you overboard, you willin! so say it!"

"I don't want to say it," muttered Cornish, penitentially. "I never
thought o' the lady. I forgot she were on board. Mr. Bo'sun, don't
say no more about it, please. I've done my duty I hope, Mr. Royle.
I've worked werry hard considerin' my bad wrist. I'd liefer fight for
the lady than agin her, now that I see wot she's made of. 'Bygones is
bygones,' as the cock as had his eye knocked out in a fight said, when
he looked about and couldn't see nothen of it; and if you call me a
willin, well and good; I'll not arguey, for I dare say you ain't fur
wrong, mate."

"Mr. Royle, you have not answered me. Will you and the others lie down
and sleep whilst I watch?"

"Not yet, Miss Robertson. By-and-by, perhaps. We have more work before
us, and are only resting. Steward!"

He came from behind the companion, where I think he had fallen asleep.

"Yes, Mr. Royle, sir."

"Cut below and mix all hands a jug of brandy-and-water, and bring some
biscuits. Here, bo'sun, is some tobacco. Smoke a pipe. Fire away,
Cornish. It's more soothing than sleep, mates."

"The lightning's growin' rayther powerful," said the boatswain, looking
astern as he loaded his pipe.

"Don't it look as if it wur settin' away to the eastards?" exclaimed
Cornish.

"No," I replied, watching the lurid gleams lighting up the piled-up
clouds. "It's coming after us dead on end, though slowly enough."

I pulled out my watch and held it close to the binnacle.

"Half-past two!" I cried, amazed at the passage of time. "Upon my word,
I didn't think it was twelve o'clock yet. Miss Robertson, I know I
cannot induce you to go below; but you must allow me to relieve you for
a spell at the wheel. I can sit and steer as well as you. You'll find
this grating comfortable."

Saying which I pulled out some flags from the locker, made a kind of
cushion for her back, and I then took her chair, keeping the wheel
steady with my foot.

There was less wind than there had been half an hour before; enough to
give the vessel steerage-way, and that was all.

We were heading S.E., the wind, or what there was of it, upon the
port-quarter. There was every promise of a calm falling again, and
this I should not have minded, nor the lightning either, which might
well have been the play of a passing thunderstorm, had it not been for
the permanent depression of the mercury.

The air was very warm, but less oppressive than it had been; the sea
black and even, and the heavens with a stooping, murky aspect.

It was some comfort to me, however, to look aloft, and see the amount
of canvas we had taken off the ship. If we could only manage to pull
up our strength again, we might still succeed in furling the main
top-gallant sail, and reefing the topsail before change of weather came.

The steward made his appearance with the spirits and biscuit; and Miss
Robertson went below, whispering to me as she passed, that she wished
to look at her father, and that she would return in a few minutes.

"Now that the lady's gone, Mr. Royle," exclaimed the boatswain as soon
as she had left the deck, "let's talk over our situation, and think
what's to be done."

The steward squatted himself on his hams like a coolie, and posed
himself in an attitude of eager attention.

"Quite right, bo'sun," I replied. "I have been thinking during the time
we have been at work, and will tell you what my plans are. At noon
yesterday--that will be fifteen hours ago--the Bermuda Islands bore as
true as a hair west-half-south. We hove to with the ship's head to the
norrard and westward, and made some way at that, and taking the run
we have made to-night, I allow that if we head the ship west by north
we shall make the islands, with anything like a breeze, some time on
Monday morning."

"But, if we're just off the coast of Florida," said Cornish, "why
couldn't we turn to and run for the West Indie Islands?"

"Which is nearest, I wonders," exclaimed the boatswain, "the West
Hindie Islands or the kingdom of Jericho?"

"It's 'ardly a time for jokin'," remonstrated the steward.

"I don't know that I said anything funny," observed Cornish, warmly.

"Well, then, wot do you mean by talking o' the West Hindie Islands?"
cried the boatswain.

"Wot do I mean?" retorted the other; "why, wot I says. Here we are off
the coast of Floridy----"

"Off the coast o' your grandmother! Shut up, mate, and let Mr. Royle
speak. You know nothen about it."

"The Bermudas are nearer to hand than the West Indies," I continued,
not choosing to explain. "What we have to do, then, the moment we can
use our legs, is to haul the ship round. How is the wind now? N.N.W.
Well, she will lie properly. And as soon as ever it comes daybreak, we
must run up a signal of distress, and keep it flying. What more can we
do?"

"I suppose," said the boatswain, doubtfully, sucking so hard at his
pipe that it glowed like a steamer's red light under his nose, "you
wouldn't like to wenture on a run to the English Channel, Mr. Royle?
It would be airning some kind o' fame, and perhaps a trifle o' money
from the owners, if it wur to git about that three hands--well, I'll
ax the steward's pardon, and say four--that four hands brought this
here blessed ship and her walleyable cargo out o' a rigular knock-down
mutiny, all aways up the Atlantic Ocean, into the Henglish Channel, and
landed her safe in the West Hindie Docks. I never see my name in print
in my life----"

"What's your true name, Mr. Bo'sun?" inquired the steward.

"Joshua, or Jo Forward, young feller; sometimes called Forrard,
sometimes Jo, and on Sundays Mister."

"I know a Forward as lives at Blackwall," said the steward.

"Do yer? Well, then, now you knows two. Wot I was sayin', Mr. Royle,
was, I never see my name in print in my life, and I should like to see
it regular wrote down in the newspapers. Lloyd's is always my weekly
pennorth ashore."

He knocked the hot ashes into the palm of his hand, scrutinised it
earnestly to see that there was no tobacco left in it, and tossed it
away.

"A good deal, sir," said the steward, in a thin voice, "is to be said
about the lady we saved. The saving of her alone, would make 'eros of
us in the public mind."

"Wot do you call us--'eros?" exclaimed the boatswain.

"Yes, sir, 'eros!"

"What's the meaning of that word, Mr. Royle?--any relation to earwigs?"

"He means heroes," I replied. "Don't you, steward?"

"I did more than mean it--I said it, sir," exclaimed the steward.

"That's how the Chaneymen talk, and quarrel with you for not followin'
of their sense. Wot do you think of my notion, Jim, of sailin' this
wessel to England?" said the boatswain.

Cornish made no answer. I saw him, in the pale light diffused around
the binnacle, wipe his mouth with the back of his hand, and shift
uneasily on his seat. I could scarcely wonder that the boatswain's idea
should make him feel uncomfortable.

"Your scheme," said I, "would be a capital one providing that every
man of us four had six hands and six legs, and the strength of three
big Johnsons, that we could do without sleep, and split ourselves into
pieces whenever we had occasion to reef topsails. But, as I am only
capable of doing one man's work, and require rest like other weakly
mortals, I must tell you plainly that I for one should be very sorry to
undertake to work this ship to the English Channel, unless you would
guarantee that by dawn this morning we should receive a draft of at
least six men out of a passing vessel."

"Well, well," said the boatswain, "it was only a thought; and I don't
say it is to be done."

"Not to be thought on--much less done," exclaimed Cornish.

"Don't be too sartin, friend," retorted the boatswain, turning smartly
on him. "'Where there's a will there's a way,' wos a sayin' when I was
a lad."

"If it comes on to blow," I put in, "it may take us all we can do to
fetch Bermuda. Don't dream of aiming for a further port."

At this moment Miss Robertson returned. I asked her how she had found
her father, and she replied, in a low voice, that he was sleeping, but
that his breathing was very faint and uncertain, and that he sometimes
talked in his sleep.

She could not disguise her anxiety, and I entreated her to go below and
watch him and rest herself as well; but she answered that she would not
leave the deck until I had finished taking in sail and doing what was
necessary.

"You cannot tell me that I am not of use," she added. "I will steer
whilst you work, and if you wish to sleep I will watch for you. Why
should I not do so? I can benefit papa more by helping you to save
the ship than by leaving you to work alone while I sit with him. I
pray God," she said, in her sweet, low, troubled voice, "that all may
go well with us. But I have been so near to death that it scarcely
frightens me now. Tell me what to do and I will do it--though for your
sake alone, as you would have sacrificed your life for mine. I owe you
what I can never repay--and how kind, how gentle, how good you have
been to my father and me!"

She spoke in so low a voice that it was impossible for any one to hear
her but myself; and so greatly did her words effect me--I, who had now
learnt to love her, who could indeed have died a hundredfold over for
her dear sake, that I dared not trust myself to speak. Had I spoken I
should have said what I was sure she would have disliked to hear from
a rough sailor like me: nay, I even turned away from her that I might
be silent, recoiling from my own heart's language that seemed but an
impertinence, an unfair obtrusion of claims which, even though she
admitted them by speaking of my having saved her life, I should have
been unmanly to assert.

I quickly recovered myself, and said, forcing a laugh--

"You are as bad a mutineer as the others. But as you will not obey me,
I must obey you."

And looking for some moments at the ponderous bank of cloud in the
north-west, of which the gathering brightness and intensity of the
lightning was illustrating its steady approach, I exclaimed--

"Are we strong enough to turn to, mates?"

"We can douse that top-gallant sail, I dare say," answered the
boatswain. "Up on your pins, steward."

And we trooped along to the main-deck.

The spell of rest, and perhaps the grog, not to mention the tobacco,
had done us no harm; the three of us went aloft, carrying the jigger
with us which we left in the main-top, and furled the top-gallant sail,
if not in man-of-war fashion and with a proper harbour bunt, at all
events very securely.

But the main-topsail was another matter. All three of us had to lay out
to windward to haul taut one earring; then skim along to the other end
of the yard to the other earring; and so up and down, and still more
reef-points and still more earrings, until my legs and fingers ached.

This job over, we rested ourselves in the main-top, and then got upon
the main-yard, and made shift to pass the yard-arm gaskets round the
sail and stow it after a fashion, though I had no doubt that the first
gale of wind that struck it would blow it clear of its lashings in a
minute.

Then on deck again with the main-topsail halliards to the capstan; and
the dawn found the ship under three close-reefed topsails, foresail,
and fore-topmast staysail, the whole of the other canvas having been
reefed and stowed by three worn-out men, one of whom had been pretty
nearly knocked up by the fight with the mutineers, the second of whom
was fresh from an imprisonment of three days in a close, stifling, and
rat-swarming coal-hole, whilst the third had received such a crack
on his wrist as would have sent any man but an English sailor to his
hammock and kept him ill and groaning for a month.


END OF VOL. II.


    LONDON:
    PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
    STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.




Transcriber's Notes:


Cover and Table of Contents created by Transcriber and placed in the
Public Domain.

Punctuation and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in the three volumes of this novel, or to remedy
simple typographical errors; otherwise they were not changed.

Dialect and other non-standard spellings have not been changed.

Spaces before the contraction "'ll" (for "will") have been retained.

Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines have been retained.

Page 82: "Sailors don't no nothing" is printed as "know" in a different
edition of this book.

Page 203: The closing quotation mark after "of them? He didn't
understand." perhaps should be after "of them?"






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK OF THE GROSVENOR, VOLUME 2 OF 3 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


