The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Wizard's Son, Vol. 1 (of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Wizard's Son, Vol. 1 (of 3)


Author: Mrs. Oliphant

Release date: December 6, 2014 [eBook #47555]
                Most recently updated: December 18, 2015

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan & the online
        Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
        http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
        images generously made available by The Internet
        Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIZARD'S SON, VOL. 1 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









                     THE WIZARD'S SON

                         A Novel

                     BY MRS. OLIPHANT

    AUTHOR OF "THE CURATE IN CHARGE," "YOUNG MUSGRAVE," ETC.


    IN THREE VOLUMES
    VOL. I.

    London
    MACMILLAN AND CO.
    1884

    [_The Right of Translation and Reproduction is Reserved_]

    LONDON:
    R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS,
    BREAD STREET HILL.




THE WIZARD'S SON.




CHAPTER I.


The Methvens occupied a little house in the outskirts of a little town
where there was not very much going on of any description, and still
less which they could take any share in, being, as they were, poor and
unable to make any effective response to the civilities shown to them.
The family consisted of three persons--the mother, who was a widow with
one son; the son himself, who was a young man of three or four and
twenty; and a distant cousin of Mrs. Methven's, who lived with her,
having no other home. It was not a very happy household. The mother had
a limited income and an anxious temper; the son a somewhat volatile and
indolent disposition, and no ambition at all as to his future, nor
anxiety as to what was going to happen to him in life. This, as may be
supposed, was enough to introduce many uneasy elements into their joint
existence; and the third of the party, Miss Merivale, was not of the
class of the peacemakers to whom Scripture allots a special blessing.
She had no amiable glamour in her eyes, but saw her friends'
imperfections with a clearness of sight which is little conducive to
that happy progress of affairs which is called "getting on." The
Methvens were sufficiently proud to keep their difficulties out of the
public eye, but on very many occasions, unfortunately, it had become
very plain to themselves that they did not "get on." It was not any want
of love. Mrs. Methven was herself aware, and her friends were in the
constant habit of saying, that she had sacrificed everything for Walter.
Injudicious friends are fond of making such statements, by way, it is to
be supposed, of increasing the devotion and gratitude of the child to
the parent: but the result is, unfortunately, very often the exact
contrary of what is desired--for no one likes to have his duty in this
respect pointed out to him, and whatever good people may think, it is
not in itself an agreeable thought that "sacrifices" have been made for
one, and an obligation placed upon one's shoulders from the beginning of
time, independent of any wish or claim upon the part of the person
served. The makers of sacrifices have seldom the reward which
surrounding spectators, and in many cases themselves, think their due.
Mrs. Methven herself would probably have been at a loss to name what
were the special sacrifices she had made for Walter. She had remained a
widow, but that she would have been eager to add was no sacrifice. She
had pinched herself more or less to find the means for his education,
which had been of what is supposed in England to be the best kind: and
she had, while he was a boy, subordinated her own tastes and pleasures
to his, and eagerly sought out everything that was likely to be
agreeable to him. When they took their yearly journey--as it is considered
necessary for him--places that Walter liked, or where he could find
amusement, or had friends, were eagerly sought for. "Women," Mrs.
Methven said, "can make themselves comfortable anywhere; but a boy, you
know, is quite different." "Quite," Miss Merivale would say: "Oh, if you
only knew them as well as we do; they are creatures entirely without
resources. You must put their toys into their very hands." "There is no
question of toys with Walter--he has plenty of resources. It is not
that," Mrs. Methven would explain, growing red. "I hope I am not one of
the silly mothers that thrust their children upon everybody: but, of
course, a boy must be considered. Everybody who has had to do with
men--or boys--knows that they must be considered." A woman whose life
has been mixed up with these troublesome beings feels the superiority of
her experience to those who know nothing about them. And in this way,
without spoiling him or treating him with ridiculous devotion, as the
king of her fate, Walter had been "considered" all his life.

For the rest, Mrs. Methven had, it must be allowed, lived a much more
agreeable life in the little society of Sloebury when her son was young
than she did now that he had come to years, mis-named, of discretion.
Then she had given her little tea-parties, or even a small occasional
dinner, at which her handsome boy would make his appearance when it was
holiday time, interesting everybody; or, when absent, would still
furnish a very pleasant subject of talk to the neighbours, who thought
his mother did a great deal too much for him, but still were pleased to
discuss a boy who was having the best of educations, and at a public
school. In those days she felt herself very comfortable in Sloebury, and
was asked to all the best houses, and felt a modest pride in the
certainty that she was able to offer something in return. But matters
were very different when Walter was four-and-twenty instead of fourteen.
By that time it was apparent that he was not going to take the world by
storm, or set the Thames on fire; and, though she had been too sensible
to brag, Mrs. Methven had thought both these things possible, and
perhaps had allowed it to be perceived that she considered something
great, something out of the way, to be Walter's certain career. But
twenty-four is, as she said herself, so different! He had been
unsuccessful in some of his examinations, and for others he had not been
"properly prepared." His mother did not take refuge in the thought that
the examiners were partial or the trials unfair; but there was naturally
always a word as to the reason why he did not succeed--he had not been
"properly prepared." He knew of one only a few days before the eventful
moment, and at this time of day, she asked indignantly, when everything
is got by competition, how is a young man who has not "crammed" to get
the better of one who has? The fact remained that at twenty-four,
Walter, evidently a clever fellow, with a great many endowments, had got
nothing to do; and, what was worse--a thing which his mother, indeed,
pretended to be unconscious of, but which everybody else in the town
remarked upon--he was not in the least concerned about this fact, but
took his doing nothing quite calmly as the course of nature, and neither
suffered from it, nor made any effort to place himself in a different
position. He "went in for" an examination when it was put before him as
a thing to do, and took his failure more than philosophically when he
failed, as, as yet, he had always done: and, in the mean time,
contentedly lived on, without disturbing himself, and tranquilly let the
time go by--the golden time which should have shaped his life.

This is not a state of affairs which can bring happiness to any
household. There is a kind of parent--or rather it should be said of a
mother, for no parent of the other sex is supposed capable of so much
folly--to whom everything is good that her child, the cherished object
of her affections, does; and this is a most happy regulation of nature,
and smooths away the greatest difficulties of life for many
simple-hearted folk, without doing half so much harm as is attributed to
it; for disapproval has little moral effect, and lessens the happiness
of all parties, without materially lessening the sins of the erring.
But, unfortunately, Mrs. Methven was not of this happy kind. She saw her
son's faults almost too clearly, and they gave her the most poignant
pain. She was a proud woman, and that he should suffer in the opinion of
the world was misery and grief to her. She was stung to the heart by
disappointment in the failure of her many hopes and projects for him.
She was stricken with shame to think of all the fine things that had
been predicted of Walter in his boyish days, and that not one of them
had come true. People had ceased now to speak of the great things that
Walter would do. They asked "_What_ was he going to do?" in an entirely
altered tone, and this went to her heart. Her pride suffered the most
terrible blow. She could not bear the thought; and though she maintained
a calm face to the world, and represented herself as entirely satisfied,
Walter knew otherwise, and had gradually replaced his old careless
affection for his mother by an embittered opposition and resistance to
her, which made both their lives wretched enough. How it was that he did
not make an effort to escape from her continual remonstrances, her
appeals and entreaties, her censure and criticism, it is very difficult
to tell. To have gone away, and torn her heart with anxiety, but
emancipated himself from a yoke which it was against the dignity of his
manhood to bear, would have been much more natural. But he had no
money, and he had not the energy to seize upon any way of providing for
himself. Had such an opportunity fallen at his feet he would probably
have accepted it with fervour; but Fortune did not put herself out of
the way to provide for him, nor he to be provided for. Notwithstanding
the many scenes which took place in the seclusion of that poor little
house, when the mother, what with love, shame, mortification, and
impatience, would all but rave in impotent passion, appealing to him, to
the pride, the ambition, the principle which so far as could be seen the
young man did not possess, Walter held upon his way with an obstinate
pertinacity, and did nothing. How he managed to do this without losing
all self-respect and every better feeling it is impossible to say; but
he did so somehow, and was still "a nice enough fellow," notwithstanding
that everybody condemned him; and had not even lost the good opinion of
the little society, though it was unanimous in blame. The only way in
which he responded to his mother's remonstrances and complaints was by
seeking his pleasure and such occupation as contented him--which
was a little cricket now and then, a little lawn-tennis, a little
flirtation--as far away from her as possible; and by being as little at
home as possible. His temper was a little spoilt by the scenes which
awaited him when he went home; and these seemed to justify to himself
his gradual separation from his mother's house: but never induced him to
sacrifice, or even modify, his own course. He appeared to think that he
had a justification for his conduct in the opposition it met with; and
that his pride was involved in the necessity for never giving in. If he
had been let alone, he represented to himself, everything would have
been different; but to yield to this perpetual bullying was against
every instinct. And even the society which disapproved so much gave a
certain encouragement to Walter in this point of view: for it was Mrs.
Methven whom everybody blamed. It was her ridiculous pride, or her
foolish indulgence, or her sinful backing-up of his natural indolence;
even some people thought it was her want of comprehension of her son
which had done it, and that Walter would have been entirely a different
person in different hands. If she had not thought it a fine thing to
have him appear as a useless fine gentleman above all necessity of
working for his living, it was incredible that he could have allowed the
years to steal by without making any exertion. This was what the town
decided, not without a good deal of sympathy for Walter. What could be
expected? Under the guidance of a foolish mother, a young man always
went wrong; and in this case he did not go wrong, poor fellow! he only
wasted his existence, nothing worse. Sloebury had much consideration for
the young man.

Perhaps it added something to the exasperation with which Mrs. Methven
saw all her efforts fail that she had some perception of this, and knew
that it was supposed to be her fault. No doubt in her soul it added to
the impatience and indignation and pain with which she contemplated the
course of affairs, which she was without strength to combat, yet could
not let alone. Now and then, indeed, she did control herself so far as
to let them alone, and then there was nothing but tranquillity and peace
in the house. But she was a conscientious woman, and, poor soul! she had
a temper--the very complacency and calm with which her son went upon his
way, the approval he showed of her better conduct when she left him to
his own devices, struck her in some moments with such sudden indignation
and pain, that she could no longer contain herself. He, who might have
been anything he pleased, to be nothing! He, of whom everybody had
predicted such great things! At such moments the sight of Walter
smiling, strolling along with his hands in his pockets, excited her
almost to frenzy. Poor lady! So many women would have been proud of
him--a handsome young fellow in flannels, with his cricket bat or his
racquet when occasion served. But love and injured pride were bitter in
her heart, and she could not bear the sight. All this while, however,
nobody knew anything about the scenes that arose in the little house,
which preserved a show of happiness and tender union long after the
reality was gone. Indeed, even Miss Merivale, who had unbounded
opportunities of knowing, took a long time to make up her mind that
Walter and his mother did not "get on."

Such was the unfortunate state of affairs at the time when this history
begins. The Methvens were distantly connected, it was known, with a
great family in Scotland, which took no notice whatever of them, and,
indeed, had very little reason so to do, Captain Methven being long
since dead, and his widow and child entirely unknown to the noble house,
from which it was so great an honour to derive a little, much-diluted,
far-off drop of blood, more blue and more rich than the common. It is
possible that had the connection been by Mrs. Methven's side she would
have known more about it, and taken more trouble to keep up her
knowledge of the family. But it was not so, and she had even in her
younger days been conscious of little slights and neglects which had
made her rather hostile than otherwise to the great people from whom her
husband came. "I know nothing about the Erradeens," she would say; "they
are much too grand to take any notice of us: and I am too proud to seek
any notice from them."

"I am afraid, my dear, there is a good deal in that," said old Mrs.
Wynn, the wife of the old rector, shaking her white head. This lady was
a sort of benign embodiment of justice in Sloebury. She punished nobody,
but she saw the right and wrong with a glance that was almost
infallible, and shook her head though she never exacted any penalty.

Here Miss Merivale would seize the occasion to strike in--

"Prejudice is prejudice," she said, "whatever form it takes. A lord has
just as much chance of being nice as an--apothecary." This was said
because the young doctor, newly admitted into his father's business,
who thought no little of himself, was within reach, and just then caught
Miss Merivale's eye.

"That is a very safe speech, seeing there are neither lords nor
apothecaries here," he said with the blandest smile. He was not a man to
be beaten at such a game.

"But a lord may have influence, you know. For Walter's sake I would not
lose sight of him," said Mrs. Wynn.

"You cannot lose sight of what you have never seen: besides, influence
is of no consequence nowadays. Nobody can do anything for you--save
yourself," said Mrs. Methven with a little sigh. Her eyes turned
involuntarily to where Walter was. He was always in the middle of
everything that was going on. Among the Sloebury young people he had a
little air of distinction, or so at least his mother thought. She was
painfully impartial, and generally, in her anxiety, perceived his bad
points rather than his good ones; but as she glanced at the group, love
for once allowed itself to speak, though always with an accent peculiar
to the character of the thinker. She allowed to herself that he had an
air of distinction, a something more than the others--alas, that nothing
ever came of it! The others all, or almost all, were already launched in
the world. They were doing or trying to do something--whereas Walter!
But she took care that nobody should hear that irrepressible sigh.

"I am very sorry for it," said Mrs. Wynn, "for there are many people
who would never push for themselves, and yet do very well indeed when
they are put in the way."

"I am all for the pushing people," said Miss Merivale. "I like the new
state of affairs. When every one stands for himself, and you get just as
much as you work for, there will be no grudges and sulkings with
society. Though I'm a Tory, I like every man to make his own way."

"A lady's politics are never to be calculated upon," said the Rector,
who was standing up against the fire on his own hearth, rubbing his old
white hands. "It is altogether against the principles of Toryism, my
dear lady, that a man should make his own way. It is sheer democracy. As
for that method of examinations, it is one of the most levelling
principles of the time--it is one of Mr. Gladstone's instruments for the
destruction of society. When the son of a cobbler is just as likely to
come to high command as your son or mine, what is to become of the
country?" the old clergyman said, lifting those thin white hands.

Mr. Gladstone's name was as a firebrand thrown into the midst of this
peaceable little country community. The speakers all took fire. They
thought that there was no doubt about what was going to come of the
country. It was going to destruction as fast as fate could carry it.
When society had dropped to pieces, and the rabble had come uppermost,
and England had become a mere name, upon which all foreign nations
should trample, and wild Irishmen dance war dances, and Americans
expectorate, then Mr. Gladstone would be seen in his true colours. While
this was going on, old Mrs. Wynn sat in her easy-chair and shook her
head. She declared always that she was no politician. And young Walter
Methven, attracted by the sudden quickening of the conversation which
naturally attended the introduction of this subject, came forward, ready
in the vein of opposition which was always his favourite attitude.

"Mr. Gladstone must be a very great man," he said. "I hear it is a sign
of being in society when you foam at the mouth at the sound of his
name."

"You young fellows think it fine to be on the popular side; but wait
till you are my age," cried one of the eager speakers. "It will not
matter much to me. There will be peace in my days." "But wait," cried
another, "and see how you will like it when everything topples down
together, the crown and the state, and the aristocracy, and public
credit, and national honour, and property, and the constitution,
and----"

So many anxious and alarmed politicians here spoke together that the
general voice became inarticulate, and Walter Methven, representing the
opposition, was at liberty to laugh.

"Come one, come all!" he cried, backed up by the arm of the sofa, upon
which Mrs. Wynn sat shaking her head. "It would be a fine thing for me
and all the other proletarians. Something would surely fall our way."

His mother watched him, standing up against the sofa, confronting them
all, with her usual exasperated and angry affection. She thought, as she
looked at him, that there was nothing he was not fit for. He was clever
enough for Parliament; he might have been prime minister--but he was
nothing! nothing, and likely to be nothing, doing nothing, desiring
nothing. Her eye fell on young Wynn, the rector's nephew, who had just
got a fellowship at his college, and on the doctor's son, who was just
entering into a share of his father's practice, and on Mr. Jeremy the
young banker, whose attentions fluttered any maiden to whom he might
address them. They were Walter's contemporaries, and not one of them was
worthy, she thought, to be seen by the side of her boy; but they had all
got before him in the race of life. They were something and he was
nothing. It was not much wonder if her heart was sore and angry. When
she turned round to listen civilly to something that was said to her,
her face was contracted and pale. It was more than she could bear. She
made a move to go away before any of the party was ready, and disturbed
Miss Merivale in the midst of a _tête-à-tête_, which was a thing not
easily forgiven.

Walter walked home with them in great good humour, but his mother knew
very well that he was not coming in. He was going to finish the evening
elsewhere. If he had come in would she have been able to restrain
herself? Would she not have fallen upon him, either in anger or in
grief, holding up to him the examples of young Wynn and young Jeremy and
the little doctor? She knew she would not have been able to refrain, and
it was almost a relief to her, though it was another pang, when he
turned away at the door.

"I want to speak to Underwood about to-morrow," he said.

"What is there about to-morrow? Of all the people in Sloebury Captain
Underwood is the one I like least," she said. "Why must you always have
something to say to him when every one else is going to bed?"

"I am not going to bed, nor is he," said Walter lightly.

Mrs. Methven's nerves were highly strung. Miss Merivale had passed in
before them, and there was nobody to witness this little struggle, which
she knew would end in nothing, but which was inevitable. She grasped him
by the arm in her eagerness and pain.

"Oh, my boy!" she said, "come in, come in, and think of something more
than the amusement of to-morrow. Life is not all play, though you seem
to think so. For once listen to me, Walter--oh, listen to me! You cannot
go on like this. Think of all the others; all at work, every one of
them, and you doing nothing."

"Do you want me to begin to do something now," said Walter, "when you
have just told me everybody was going to bed?"

"Oh! if I were you," she cried in her excitement, "I would rest neither
night nor day. I would not let it be said that I was the last, and every
one of them before me."

Walter shook himself free of her detaining hold. "Am I to be a dustman,
or a scavenger, or--what?" he said, contemptuously. "I know no other
trades that are followed at this hour."

Mrs. Methven had reached the point at which a woman has much ado not to
cry in the sense of impotence and exasperation which such an argument
brings. "It is better to do anything than to do nothing," she cried,
turning away from him and hastening in at the open door.

He paused a moment, as if doubtful what to do; there was something in
her hasty withdrawal which for an instant disposed him to follow, and
she paused breathless, with a kind of hope, in the half-light of the
little hall; but the next moment his footsteps sounded clear and quick
on the pavement, going away. Mrs. Methven waited until they were almost
out of hearing before she closed the door. Angry, baffled, helpless,
what could she do? She wiped a hot tear from the corner of her eye
before she went into the drawing-room, where her companion, always on
the alert, had already turned up the light of the lamp, throwing an
undesired illumination upon her face, flushed and troubled from this
brief controversy.

"I thought you were never coming in," said Miss Merivale, "and that
open door sends a draught all through the house."

"Walter detained me for a moment to explain some arrangements he has to
make for to-morrow," Mrs. Methven said with dignity. "He likes to keep
me _au courant_ of his proceedings."

Miss Merivale was absolutely silenced by this sublime assumption,
notwithstanding the flush of resentment, the glimmer of moisture in the
mother's eye.




CHAPTER II.


Walter walked along the quiet, almost deserted street with a hasty step
and a still hastier rush of disagreeable thoughts. There was, he felt,
an advantage in being angry, in the sensation of indignant resistance to
a petty tyranny. For a long time past he had taken refuge in this from
every touch of conscience and sense of time lost and opportunities
neglected. He was no genius, but he was not so dull as not to know that
his life was an entirely unsatisfactory one, and himself in the wrong
altogether; everything rotten in the state of his existence, and a great
deal that must be set right one time or another in all his habits and
ways. The misfortune was that it was so much easier to put off this
process till to-morrow than to begin it to-day. He had never been roused
out of the boyish condition of mind in which a certain resistance to
authority was natural, and opposition to maternal rule and law a sort of
proof of superiority and independence. Had this been put into words, and
placed before him as the motive of much that he did, no one would have
coloured more angrily or resented more hotly the suggestion; and yet in
the bottom of his heart he would have known it to be true. All through
his unoccupied days he carried with him the sense of folly, the
consciousness that he could not justify to himself the course he was
pursuing. The daily necessity of justifying it to another was almost the
sole thing that silenced his conscience. His mother, who kept "nagging"
day after day, who was never satisfied, whose appeals he sometimes
thought theatrical, and her passion got up, was his sole defence against
that self-dissatisfaction which is the severest of all criticisms. If
she would but let him alone, leave him to his own initiative, and not
perpetually endeavour to force a change which to be effectual, as all
authorities agreed, must come of itself! He was quite conscious of the
inadequacy of this argument, and in his heart felt that it was a poor
thing to take advantage of it; but yet, on the surface of his mind, put
it forward and made a bulwark of it against his own conscience. He did
so now as he hurried along, in all the heat that follows a personal
encounter. If she would but let him alone! But he could not move a step
anywhere, could not make an engagement, could not step into a friend's
rooms, as he was going to do now, without her interference. The
relations of a parent to an only child are not the same as those that
exist between a father and mother and the different members of a large
family. It has been usual to consider them in one particular light as
implying the closest union and mutual devotion. But there is another
point of view in which to consider the question. They are so near to
each other, and the relationship so close, that there is a possibility
of opposition and contrariety more trying, more absorbing, than any
other except that between husband and wife. A young son does not always
see the necessity of devotion to a mother who is not very old, who has
still many sources of pleasure apart from himself, and who is not
capable, perhaps, on her side, of the undiscriminating worship which is
grandmotherly, and implies a certain weakness and dimness of perception
in the fond eyes that see everything in a rosy, ideal light. This fond
delusion is often in its way a moral agent, obliging the object of it to
fulfil what is expected of him, and reward the full and perfect trust
which is given so unhesitatingly. But in this case it was not possible.
The young man thought, or persuaded himself, that his mother's vexatious
watch over him, and what he called her constant suspicion and doubt of
him, had given him a reason for the disgust and impatience with which he
turned from her control. He pictured to himself the difference which a
father's larger, more generous sway would have made in him; to that he
would have answered, he thought, like a ship to its helm, like an army
to its general. But this petty rule, this perpetual fault-finding,
raised up every faculty in opposition. Even when he meant the best, her
words of warning, her reminders of duty, were enough to set him all
wrong again. He thought, as a bad husband often thinks when he is
conscious of the world's disapproval, that it was her complaints that
were the cause. And when he was reminded by others, well-meaning but
injudicious, of all he owed to his mother, his mind rose yet more
strongly in opposition, his spirit refused the claim. This is a very
different picture from that of the widow's son whose earliest
inspiration is his sense of duty to his mother, and adoring gratitude
for her care and love--but it is perhaps as true a one. A young man may
be placed in an unfair position by the excessive claim made upon his
heart and conscience in this way, and so Walter felt it. He might have
given all that, and more, if nothing had been asked of him; but when he
was expected to feel so much, he felt himself half justified in feeling
nothing. Thus the situation had become one of strained and continual
opposition. It was a kind of duel, in which the younger combatant at
least--the assailed person, whose free-will and independence were
hampered by such perpetual requirements--never yielded a step. The other
might do so, by turns throwing up her arms altogether, but not he.

It was with this feeling strong in his mind, and affecting his temper as
nothing else does to such a degree, that he hastened along the street
towards the rooms occupied by Captain Underwood, a personage whom the
ladies of Sloebury were unanimous in disliking. Nobody knew exactly
where it was that he got his military title. He did not belong to any
regiment in her Majesty's service. He had not even the humble claim of a
militia officer; yet nobody dared say that there was anything fictitious
about him, or stigmatise the captain as an impostor. Other captains and
colonels and men-at-arms of undoubted character supported his claims; he
belonged to one or two well-known clubs. An angry woman would sometimes
fling an insult at him when her husband or son came home penniless after
an evening in his company, wondering what they could see in an
under-bred fellow who was no more a captain (she would say in her wrath)
than she was; but of these assertions there was no proof, and the
vehemence of them naturally made the captain's partisans more and more
eager in his favour. He had not been above six months in Sloebury, but
everybody knew him. There was scarcely an evening in which half-a-dozen
men did not congregate in his rooms, drawn together by that strange
attraction which makes people meet who do not care in the least for each
other's company, nor have anything to say to each other, yet are
possibly less vacant in society than when alone, or find the murmur of
many voices, the smoke of many cigars, exhilarating and agreeable. It
was not every evening that the cards were produced. The captain was
wary; he frightened nobody; he did not wish to give occasion to the
tremors of the ladies, whom he would have conciliated even, if he had
been able; but there are men against whom the instinct of all women
rises, as there are women from whom all men turn. It was only now and
then that he permitted play. He spoke indeed strongly against it on many
occasions. "What do you want with cards?" he would say. "A good cigar
and a friend to talk to ought to be enough for any man." But twice or
thrice in a week his scruples would give way. He was a tall, well-formed
man, of an uncertain age, with burning hazel eyes, and a scar on his
forehead got in that mysterious service to which now and then he made
allusion, and which his friends concluded must have been in some foreign
legion, or with Garibaldi, or some other irregular warfare. There were
some who thought him a man, old for his age, of thirty-five, and some
who, concluding him young for his age, and well preserved, credited him
with twenty years more; but thirty-five or fifty-five, whichever it was,
he was erect and strong, and well set up, and possessed an amount of
experience and apparent knowledge of the world, at which the striplings
of Sloebury admired and wondered, and which even the older men
respected, as men in the country respect the mention of great names and
incidents that have become historical. He had a way of recommending
himself even to the serious, and would now and then break forth, as if
reluctantly, into an account of some instance of faith or patience on
the battlefield or the hospital which made even the rector declare that
to consider Underwood as an irreligious man was both unjust and unkind.
So strong was the prejudice of the women, however, that Mrs. Wynn,
always charitable, and whose silent protest was generally only made when
the absent were blamed, shook her head at this testimony borne in favour
of the Captain. She had no son to be led away, and her husband it need
not be said, considering his position, was invulnerable; but with all
her charity she could not believe in the religion of Captain Underwood.
His rooms were very nice rooms in the best street in Sloebury, and if
his society was what is called "mixed," yet the best people were
occasionally to be met there, as well as those who were not the best.

There was a little stir in the company when Walter entered. To tell the
truth, notwithstanding the wild mirth and dissipation which the ladies
believed to go on in Captain Underwood's rooms, the society assembled
there was at the moment dull and in want of a sensation. There had not
been anything said for the course of two minutes at least. There was no
play going on, and the solemn puff of smoke from one pair of lips after
another would have been the height of monotony had it not been the
wildest fun and gratification. The men in the room took pipes and cigars
out of their mouths to welcome the new-comer. "Hallo, Walter!" they all
said in different tones; for in Sloebury the use of Christian names was
universal, everybody having known everybody else since the moment of
their birth.

"Here comes Methven," said the owner of the rooms (it was one of his
charms, in the eyes of the younger men, that he was not addicted to this
familiarity), "in the odour of sanctity. It will do us all good to have
an account of the rector's party. How did you leave the old ladies, my
excellent boy?"

"Stole away like the fox, by Jove," said the hunting man, who was the
pride of Sloebury.

"More like the mouse with the old cats after it," said another wit.

Now Walter had come in among them strong in his sense of right and in
his sense of wrong, feeling himself at the same moment a sorry fool and
an injured hero, a sufferer for the rights of man; and it would have
been of great use to him in both these respects to have felt himself
step into a superior atmosphere, into the heat of a political
discussion, or even into noisy amusement, or the passion of
play--anything which would rouse the spirits and energies, and show the
action of a larger life. But to feel his own arrival a sort of godsend
in the dulness, and to hear nothing but the heavy puff of all the smoke,
and the very poor wit with which he was received, was sadly
disconcerting, and made him more and more angry with himself and the
circumstances which would give him no sort of support or comfort.

"The old ladies," he said, "were rather more lively than you fellows.
You look as if you had all been poisoned in your wine, like the men in
the opera, and expected the wall to open and the monks and the coffins
to come in."

"I knew that Methven would bring us some excellent lesson," said Captain
Underwood. "Remember that we have all to die. Think, my friends, upon
your latter end."

"Jump up here and give us a sermon, Wat."

"Don't tease him, he's dangerous."

"The old ladies have been too much for him."

This went on till Walter had settled down into his place, and lighted
his pipe like the rest. He looked upon them with disenchanted eyes; not
that he had ever entertained any very exalted opinion of his company;
but to-night he was out of sympathy with all his surroundings, and he
felt it almost a personal offence that there should be so little to
attract and excite in this manly circle which thought so much more of
itself than of any other, and was so scornful of the old ladies who
after all were not old ladies: but the graver members of the community
in general, with an ornamental adjunct of young womankind. On ordinary
occasions no doubt Walter would have chimed in with the rest, but
to-night he was dissatisfied and miserable, not sure of any sensation in
particular, but one of scorn and distaste for his surroundings. He would
have felt this in almost any conceivable case, but in the midst of this
poor jesting and would-be wit, the effect was doubled. Was it worth
while for this to waste his time, to offend the opinion of all his
friends? Such thoughts must always come in similar circumstances. Even
in the most brilliant revelry there will be a pause, a survey of the
position, a sense, however unwilling that the game is not worth the
candle. But here! They were all as dull as ditch water, he said to
himself. Separately there was scarcely one whom he would have selected
as an agreeable companion, and was it possible by joining many dulnesses
together to produce a brilliant result? There was no doubt that Walter's
judgment was jaundiced that evening; for he was not by any means so
contemptuous of his friends on ordinary occasions; but he had been eager
to find an excuse for himself, to be able to say that here was real life
and genial society in place of the affected solemnity of the proper
people. When he found himself unable to do this, he was struck as by a
personal grievance, and sat moody and abstracted, bringing a chill upon
everybody, till one by one the boon companions strolled away.

"A pretty set of fellows to talk of dulness," he cried, with a little
burst, "as if they were not dull beyond all description themselves."

"Come, Methven, you are out of temper," said Captain Underwood. "They
are good fellows enough when you are in the vein for them. Something has
put you out of joint."

"Nothing at all," cried Walter, "except the sight of you all sitting as
solemn as owls pretending to enjoy yourselves. At the rectory one yawned
indeed, it was the genius of the place--but to hear all those dull dogs
laughing at that, as if they were not a few degrees worse! Is there
nothing but dulness in life? Is everything the same--one way or
another--and nothing to show for it all, when it is over, but
tediousness and discontent?"

Underwood looked at him keenly with his fiery eyes.

"So you've come to that already, have you?" he said. "I thought you were
too young and foolish."

"I am not so young as not to know that I am behaving like an idiot,"
Walter said. Perhaps he had a little hope of being contradicted and
brought back to his own esteem.

But instead of this, Captain Underwood only looked at him again and
laughed.

"I know," he said: "the conscience has its tremors, especially after an
evening at the rectory. You see how well respectability looks, how
comfortable it is."

"I do nothing of the sort," Walter cried indignantly. "I see how dull
you are, you people who scoff at respectability, and I begin to wonder
whether it is not better to be dull and thrive than to be dull and
perish. They seem much the same thing so far as enjoyment goes."

"You want excitement," said the other carelessly. "I allow there is not
much of that here."

"I want something," cried Walter. "Cards even are better than nothing. I
want to feel that I have blood in my veins."

"My dear boy, all that is easily explained. You want money. Money is the
thing that mounts the blood in the veins. With money you can have as
much excitement, as much movement as you like. Let people say what they
please, there is nothing else that does it," said the man of experience.
He took a choice cigar leisurely from his case as he spoke. "A bit of a
country town like this, what can you expect from it? There is no go in
them. They risk a shilling, and go away frightened if they lose. If they
don't go to church on Sunday they feel all the remorse of a villain in a
play. It's all petty here--everything's petty, both the vices and the
virtues. I don't wonder you find it slow. What I find it, I needn't
say."

"Why do you stop here, then?" said Walter, not unnaturally, with a
momentary stare of surprise. Then he resumed, being full of his own
subject. "I know I'm an ass," he said. "I loaf about here doing nothing
when I ought to be at work. I don't know why I do it; but neither do I
know how to get out of it. You, that's quite another thing. You have no
call to stay. I wonder you do: why do you? If I were as free as you, I
should be off--before another day."

"Come along then," said Underwood, good-humouredly. "I'll go if you'll
go."

At this Walter shook his head.

"I have no money you know. I ought to be in an office or doing
something. I can't go off to shoot here or fish there, like you."

"By and by--by and by. You have time enough to wait."

Walter gave him a look of surprise.

"There is nothing to wait for," he said. "Is that why you have said so
many things to me about seeing life? I have nothing. We've got no money
in the family. I may wait till doomsday, but it will do nothing for me."

"Don't be too sure of that," said Underwood. "Oh, you needn't devour me
with your eyes. I know nothing of your family affairs. I suppose of
course that by and by, in the course of nature----"

"You mean," said Walter, turning pale, "when my mother dies. No, I'm not
such a wretched cad as that: if I didn't know I should get next to
nothing then, I----" (His conscience nearly tripped this young man up,
running into his way so hurriedly that he caught his foot unawares.)
Then he stopped and grew red, staring at his companion. "Most of what
she has dies with her, if that's what you're thinking of. There is
nothing in that to build upon. And I'm glad of it," the young man cried.

"I beg your pardon, Methven," said the other. "But it needn't be that;
there are other ways of getting rich."

"I don't know any of them, unless by work: and how am I to work? It is
so easy to speak. What can I work at? and where am I to get it?--there
is the question. I hear enough on that subject--as if I were a tailor
or a shoemaker that could find something to do at any corner. There is
no reason in it," the young man said, so hotly, and with such a flush of
resentful obstinacy, that the fervour of his speech betrayed him. He was
like a man who had outrun himself, and paused, out of breath.

"You'll see; something will turn up," said Underwood, with a laugh.

"What can turn up?--nothing. Suppose I go to New Zealand and come back
at fifty with my fortune made--Fifty's just the age, isn't it, to begin
to enjoy yourself," cried Walter, scornfully; "when you have not a tooth
left, nor a faculty perfect?" He was so young that the half-century
appeared to him like the age of Methusaleh, and men who lived to that
period as having outlived all that is worth living for. His mentor
laughed a little uneasily, as if he had been touched by this chance
shot.

"It is not such a terrible age after all," he said. "A man can still
enjoy himself when he is fifty; but I grant you that at twenty-four it's
a long time to wait for your pleasure. However, let us hope something
will turn up before then. Supposing, for the sake of argument, you were
to come in to your fortune more speedily, I wonder what you would do
with it--eh? you are such a terrible fellow for excitement. The turf?"

"All that is folly," said Walter, getting up abruptly. "Nothing more,
thanks. I am coming in to no fortune. And you don't understand me a
bit," he said, turning at the door of the room, to look back upon the
scene where he had himself spent so many hours, made piquant by a sense
of that wrongdoing which supplies excitement when other motives fail.
The chairs standing about as their occupants had thrust them away from
the table, the empty glasses upon it, the disorder of the room, struck
him with a certain sense of disgust. It was a room intended by nature to
be orderly and sober, with heavy country-town furniture, and nothing
about it that could throw any grace on disarray. The master of the place
stood against the table swaying a somewhat heavy figure over it, and
gazing at the young man with his fiery eyes. Walter's rudeness did not
please him, any more than his abrupt withdrawal.

"Don't be too sure of that," he said, with an effort to retain his
good-humoured aspect. "If I don't understand you, I should like to know
who does? and when that fortune comes, you will remember what I say."

"Pshaw!" Walter cried, impatiently turning away. A nod of his head was
all the good-night he gave. He hurried down as he had hurried up, still
as little contented, as full of dissatisfaction as when he came. This
man who thought he understood him, who intended to influence him,
revolted the young man's uneasy sense of independence, as much as did
the bond of more lawful authority. Did Underwood, _too_, think him a
child not able to guide himself? It was very late by this time, and the
streets very silent. He walked quickly home through the wintry darkness
of November, with a mind as thoroughly out of tune as it is possible to
imagine. He had gone to Underwood's in the hot impulse of opposition,
with the hope of getting rid temporarily, at least, of the struggle
within him; but he had not got rid of it. The dull jokes of the
assembled company had only made the raging of the inward storm more
sensible, and the jaunty and presumptuous misconception with which his
host received his involuntary confidences afterwards, had aggravated
instead of soothing his mind. Indeed, Underwood's pretence at knowing
all about it, his guesses and attempts to sound his companion's mind,
and the blundering interpretation of it into which he stumbled, filled
Walter with double indignation and disgust. This man too he had thought
much of, and expected superior intelligence from--and all that he had to
say was an idiotic anticipation of some miraculous coming into a fortune
which Walter was aware was as likely to happen to the beggar on the
streets as to himself. He had been angry with nature and his mother when
he left her door; he was angry with everybody when he returned to it,
though his chief anger of all, and the root of all the others, was that
anger with himself, which burnt within his veins, and which is the
hardest of all others to quench out.




CHAPTER III.


Walter was very late next morning as he had been very late at night. The
ladies had breakfasted long before, and there was a look of reproach in
the very table-cloth left there so much after the usual time, and
scrupulously cleared of everything that the others had used, and
arranged at one end, with the dish kept hot for him, and the small
teapot just big enough for one, which was a sermon in itself. His mother
was seated by the fire with her weekly books, which she was adding up.
She said scarcely anything to him, except the morning greeting, filling
out his tea with a gravity which was all the more crushing that there
was nothing in it to object to, nothing to resent. Adding up accounts of
itself is not cheerful work; but naturally the young man resented this
seriousness all the more because he had no right to do so. It was
intolerable, he felt, to sit and eat in presence of that silent figure
partly turned away from him, jotting down the different amounts on a bit
of paper, and absorbed in that occupation as if unconscious of his
presence. Even scolding was better than this; Walter was perfectly
conscious of all it was in her power to say. He knew by heart her
remonstrances and appeals. But he disliked the silence more than all. He
longed to take her by the shoulders, and cry, "What is it? What have you
got to say to me? What do you mean by sitting there like a stone figure,
and _meaning_ it all the same!" He did not do this, knowing it would be
foolish, and gave his constant antagonist a certain advantage; but he
longed to get rid of some of his own exasperation by such an act. It was
with a kind of force over himself that he ate his breakfast, going
through all the forms, prolonging it to the utmost of his power, helping
himself with deliberate solemnity in defiance of the spectator, who
seemed so absorbed in her own occupation, but was, he felt sure,
watching his every movement. It was not, however, until he had come to
an end of his prolonged meal and of his newspaper, that his mother
spoke.

"Do you think," she said, "that it would be possible for you to write
that letter to Mr. Milnathort of which I have spoken so often, to-day?"

"Oh, quite possible," said Walter, carelessly.

"Will you do it, then? It seems to me very important to your interests.
Will you really do it, and do it to-day?"

"I'll see about it," Walter said.

"I don't ask you to see about it. It is nothing very difficult. I ask
you to do it at once--to-day."

He gazed at her for a moment with an angry obstinacy.

"I see no particular occasion for all this haste. It has stood over a
good many days. Why should you insist so upon it now?"

"Every day that it has been put off has been a mistake. It should have
been done at once," Mrs. Methven said.

"I'll see about it," he said carelessly; and he went out of the room
with a sense of having exasperated her as usual, which was almost
pleasant.

At the bottom of his heart he meant to do what his mother had asked of
him: but he would not betray his good intentions. He preferred to look
hostile even when he was in the mind to be obedient. He went away to the
little sitting-room which was appropriated to him, where his pipes
adorned the mantelpiece, and sat down to consider the situation. To
write a letter was not a great thing to do, and he fully meant to do it;
but after he had mused a little angrily upon the want of perception
which made his mother adopt that cold and hectoring tone, when if she
had asked him gently he would have done it in a minute, he put forth his
hand and drew a book towards him. It was not either a new or an
entertaining book, but it secured his idle attention until he suddenly
remembered that it was time to go out. The letter was not written, but
what did that matter? The post did not go out till the afternoon, and
there was plenty of time between that time and this to write
half-a-dozen letters. It would do very well, he thought, when he came in
for lunch. So he threw down the book and got his hat and went out.

Mrs. Methven, who was on the watch, hearing his every movement, came
into his room after he was gone, and looked round with eager eyes to see
if the letter was written, if there was any trace of it. Perhaps he had
taken it out with him to post it, she thought: and though it was
injurious to her that she should not know something more about a piece
of business in which he was not the sole person concerned, yet it gave
her a sort of relief to think that so much at least he had done. She
went back to her books with an easier mind. She was far from being a
rich woman, but her son had known none of her little difficulties, her
efforts to make ends meet. She had thought it wrong to trouble his
childhood with such confidences, and he had grown up thinking nothing on
the subject, without any particular knowledge of, or interest in, her
affairs, taking everything for granted. It was her own fault, she said
to herself, and so it was to some extent. She would sometimes think that
if she had it to do over again she would change all that. How often do
we think this, and with what bitter regret, in respect to the children
whom people speak of as wax in our hands, till we suddenly wake up and
find them iron! She had kept her difficulties out of Walter's way, and
instead of being grateful to her for so doing, he was simply
indifferent, neither inquiring nor caring to know. Her own doing! It was
easier to herself, yet bitter beyond telling, to acknowledge it to be
so. Just at this time, when Christmas was approaching, the ends took a
great deal of tugging and coaxing to bring them together. A few of
Walter's bills had come in unexpectedly, putting her poor balance
altogether wrong. Miss Merivale contributed a little, but only a little,
to the housekeeping; for Mrs. Methven was both proud and liberal, and
understood giving better than receiving. She went back to the
dining-room, where all her books lay upon the table, near the fire. Her
reckoning had advanced much since she had begun it, with Walter sitting
at breakfast. Her faculties had been all absorbed in him and what he was
doing. Now she addressed herself to her accounts with a strenuous
effort. It is hard work to balance a small sum of money against a large
number of bills, to settle how to divide it so as that everybody shall
have something, and the mouths of hungry creditors be stopped. Perhaps
we might say that this was one of the fine arts--so many pounds here, so
many there, keeping credit afloat, and the wolf of debt from the door.
Mrs. Methven was skilled in it. She went to this work, feeling all its
difficulty and burden: yet, with a little relief, not because she saw
any way out of her difficulties, but because Walter had written that
letter. It was always something done, she thought, in her simplicity,
and something might come of it, some way in which he could get the means
of exercising his faculties, perhaps of distinguishing himself even
yet.

Walter for his part strolled away through the little town in his usual
easy way. It was a fine, bright, winterly morning, not cold, yet cold
enough to make brisk walking pleasant, and stir the blood in young
veins. There was no football going on, nor any special amusement. He
could not afford to hunt, and the only active winter exercise which he
could attain was limited to this game--of which there was a good deal at
Sloebury--and skating, when it pleased Providence to send ice, which was
too seldom. He looked in upon one or two of his cronies, and played a
game of billiards, and hung about the High Street to see what was going
on. There was nothing particular going on, but the air was fresh, and
the sun shining, and a little pleasant movement about, much more
agreeable at least than sitting in a stuffy little room writing a
troublesome letter which he felt sure would not do the least good.
Finally, he met Captain Underwood, who regarded him with a look which
Walter would have called anxious had he been able to imagine any
possible reason why Underwood should entertain any anxiety on his
account.

"Well! any news?" the captain cried.

"News! What news should there be in this dead-alive place?" Walter said.

The other looked at him keenly as if to see whether he was quite
sincere, and then said, "Come and have some lunch."

He was free of all the best resorts in Sloebury, this mysterious
man. He belonged to the club, he was greatly at his ease in the
hotel--everything was open to him. Walter, who had but little money
of his own, and could not quite cut the figure he wished, was not
displeased to be thus exhibited as the captain's foremost ally.

"I thought you might have come into that fortune, you are looking so
spruce," the captain said, and laughed. But though he laughed he kept an
eye on the young man as if the pleasantry meant more than appeared.
Walter felt a momentary irritation with this, which seemed to him a very
bad joke; but he went with the captain all the same, not without a
recollection of the table at home, at which, after waiting three
quarters of an hour or so, and watching at the window for his coming,
the ladies would at last sit down. But he was not a child to be forced
to attendance at every meal, he said to himself. The captain's
attentions to him were great, and it was a very nice little meal that
they had together.

"I expect you to do great things for me when you come into your fortune.
You had better engage me at once as your guide, philosopher, and
friend," he said, with a laugh. "Of course you will quit Sloebury, and
make yourself free of all this bondage."

"Oh, of course," said Walter, humouring the joke, though it was so bad a
one in every way.

He could not quarrel with his host at his own table, and perhaps after
all it was more dignified to take it with good humour.

"You must not go in for mere expense," the captain said; "you must make
it pay. I can put you up to a thing or two. You must not go into the
world like a pigeon to be plucked. It would effect my personal honour if
a pupil of mine--for I consider you as a pupil of mine, Methven, I think
I have imparted to you a thing or two. You are not quite the simpleton
you used to be, do you think you are?"

Walter received this with great gravity, though he tried to look as if
he were not offended.

"Was I a simpleton?" he said. "I suppose in one's own case one never
sees."

"Were you a simpleton!" said the other, with a laugh, and then he
stopped himself, always keenly watching the young man's face, and
perceiving that he was going too far. "But I flatter myself you could
hold your own at whist with any man now," the captain said.

This pleased the young man; his gravity unbended a little; there was a
visible relaxation of the corners of his mouth. To be praised is always
agreeable. Moral applause, indeed, may be taken with composure, but who
could hear himself applauded for his whist-playing without an
exhilaration of the heart? He said, with satisfaction, "I always was
pretty good at games," at which his instructor laughed again, almost too
much for perfect good breeding.

"I like to have young fellows like you to deal with," he said, "fellows
with a little spirit, that are born for better things. Your
country-town young man is as fretful and frightened when he loses a few
shillings as if it were thousands. But that's one of the reasons why I
feel you're born to luck, my boy. I know a man of liberal breeding
whenever I see him, he is not frightened about a nothing. That's one of
the things I like in you, Methven. You deserve a fortune, and you
deserve to have me for your guide, philosopher, and friend."

All this was said by way of joke; but it was strange to see the steady
watch which he kept on the young man's face. One would have said a
person of importance whom Underwood meant to try his strength with, but
guardedly, without going too far, and even on whom he was somehow
dependent, anxious to make a good impression. Walter, who knew his own
favour to be absolutely without importance, and that Underwood above
all, his host and frequent entertainer, could be under no possible
delusion on the subject, was puzzled, yet flattered, feeling that only
some excellence on his part, undiscovered by any of his other
acquaintances, could account for this. So experienced a person could
have "no motive" in thus paying court to a penniless and prospectless
youth. Walter was perplexed, but he was gratified too. He had not seen
many of the captain's kind; nobody who knew so many people or who was so
much at his ease with the world. Admiration of this vast acquaintance,
and of the familiarity with which the captain treated things and people
of which others spoke with bated breath, had varied in his mind with a
fluctuating sense that Underwood was not exactly so elevated a person as
he professed to be, and even that there were occasional vulgarities in
this man of the world. Walter felt these, but in his ignorance
represented to himself that perhaps they were right enough, and only
seemed vulgar to him who knew no better. And to-day there is no doubt he
was somewhat intoxicated by this flattery. It must be disinterested, for
what could he do for anybody? He confided to the captain more than he
had ever done before of his own position. He described how he was being
urged to write to old Milnathort. "He is an old lawyer in Scotland--what
they call a writer--and it is supposed he might be induced to take me
into his office, for the sake of old associations. I don't know what the
associations are, but the position does not smile upon me," Walter said.

"Your family then is a Scotch family?" said the captain with a nod of
approval. "I thought as much."

"I don't know that I've got a family," said Walter.

"On the contrary, Methven is a very good name. There are half-a-dozen
baronets at least, and a peer--you must have heard of him, Lord
Erradeen."

"Oh yes, I've heard of him," Walter said with a conscious look.

If he had been more in the world he would have said "he is a cousin of
mine," but he was aware that the strain of kindred was very far off, and
he was at once too shy and too proud to claim it. His companion waited
apparently for the disclosure, then finding it did not come opened the
way.

"If he's a relation of yours, it's to him you ought to write; very
likely he would do something for you. They are a curious family. I've
had occasion to know something about them."

"I think you know everybody, Underwood."

"Well, I have knocked about the world a great deal; in that way one
comes across a great many people. I saw a good deal of the present lord
at one time. He was a very queer man--they are all queer. If you are one
of them you'll have to bear your share in it. There is a mysterious
house they have--You would think I was an idiot if I told you half the
stories I have heard----"

"About the Erradeens?"

"About everybody," said the captain evasively. "There is scarcely a
family, that, if you go right into it, has not something curious about
them. We all have; but those that last and continue keep it on record. I
could tell you the wildest tales about So-and-so and So-and-so, very
ordinary people to look at, but with stories that would make your hair
stand on end."

"We have nothing to do with things of that sort. My people have always
been straightforward and above-board."

"For as much as you know, perhaps; but go back three or four generations
and how can you tell? We have all of us ancestors that perhaps were not
much to brag of."

Walter caught Underwood's eye as he said this, and perhaps there was a
twinkle in it, for he laughed.

"It is something," he said, "to have ancestors at all."

"If they were the greatest blackguards in the world," the captain said
with a responsive laugh, "that's what I think. You don't want any more
of my revelations? Well, never mind, probably I shall have you coming to
me some of these days quite humbly to beg for more information. You are
not cut out for an attorney's office. It is very virtuous, of course, to
give yourself up to work and turn your back upon life."

"Virtue be hanged," said Walter, with some excitement, "it is not
virtue, but necessity, which I take to be the very opposite. I know I'm
wasting my time, but I mean to turn over a new leaf. And as the first
evidence of that, as soon as I go home I shall write to old Milnathort."

"Not to-day," said Underwood, looking at his watch; "the post has gone;
twenty-four hours more to think about it will do you no harm."

Walter started to his feet, and it was with a real pang that he saw how
the opportunity had escaped him, and his intention in spite of himself
been balked; a flush of shame came over his face. He felt that, if never
before, here was a genuine occasion for blame. To be sure, the same
thing had happened often enough before, but he had never perhaps so
fully intended to do what was required of him. He sat down again with a
muttered curse at himself and his own folly. There was nothing to be
said for him. He had meant to turn over a new leaf, and yet this day was
just like the last. The thought made his heart sick for the moment. But
what was the use of making a fuss and betraying himself to a stranger?
He sat down again, with a self-disgust which made him glad to escape
from his own company. Underwood's talk might be shallow enough, perhaps
his pretence at knowledge was not very well founded, but he was safer
company than conscience, and that burning and miserable sense of moral
impotence which is almost worse than the more tragic stings of
conscience. To find out that your resolution is worth nothing, after you
have put yourself to the trouble of making it, and that habit is more
strong than any motive, is not a pleasant thing to think of. Better let
the captain talk about Lord Erradeen, or any other lord in the peerage.
Underwood, being encouraged with a few questions, talked very largely on
this subject. He gave the young man many pieces of information, which
indeed he could have got in Debrett if he had been anxious on the
subject; and as the afternoon wore on they strolled out again for
another promenade up and down the more populous parts of Sloebury, and
there fell in with other idlers like themselves; and when the twilight
yielded to the more cheerful light of the lamps, betook themselves to
whist, which was sometimes played in the captain's rooms at that immoral
hour. Sloebury, even the most advanced portion of it, had been
horrified at the thought of whist before dinner when the captain first
suggested it, but that innocent alarm had long since melted away. There
was nothing dangerous about it, no stakes which any one could be hurt by
losing. When Walter, warned by the breaking up of the party that it was
the hour for dinner, took his way home also, he was the winner of a
sixpence or two, and no more: there had been nothing wrong in the play.
But when he turned the corner of Underwood's street and found himself
with the wind in his face on his way home, the revulsion of feeling from
something like gaiety to a rush of disagreeable anticipations, a crowd
of uncomfortable thoughts, was pitiful. In spite of all our boastings of
home and home influence, how many experience this change the moment they
turn their face in the direction of that centre where it is conventional
to suppose all comfort and shelter is! There is a chill, an abandonment
of pleasant sensations, a preparation for those that are not pleasant.
Walter foresaw what he would find there with an impatience and
resentment which were almost intolerable. Behind the curtain, between
the laths of the Venetian blind, his mother would be secretly on the
outlook watching for his return; perhaps even she had stolen quietly to
the door, and, sheltered in the darkness of the porch, was looking out;
or, if not that, the maid who opened the door would look reproachfully
at him, and ask if he was going to dress, or if she might serve the
dinner at once: it must have been waiting already nearly half an hour.
He went on very quickly, but his thoughts lingered and struggled with
the strong disinclination that possessed him. How much he would have
given not to go home at all! how little pleasure he expected when he got
there! His mother most likely would be silent, pale with anger, saying
little, while Cousin Sophia would get up a little conversation. She
would talk lightly about anything that might have been happening, and
Walter would perhaps exert himself to give Sophia back her own, and show
his mother that he cared nothing about her displeasure. And then when
dinner was over, he would hurry out again, glad to be released. Home:
this was what it had come to be: and nothing could mend it so far as
either mother or son could see. Oh, terrible incompatibility,
unapproachableness of one soul to another! To think that they should be
so near, yet so far away. Even in the case of husband and wife the
severance is scarcely so terrible; for they have come towards each other
out of different spheres, and if they do not amalgamate, there are many
secondary causes that may be blamed, differences of nature and training
and thought. But a mother with her child, whom she has brought up, whose
first opinions she has implanted, who ought naturally to be influenced
by her ways of thinking, and even by prejudices and superstitions in
favour of her way! It was not, however, this view of the question which
moved the young man. It was the fact of his own bondage, the compulsion
he was under to return to dinner, to give some partial obedience to the
rules of the house, and to confess that he had not written that letter
to Mr. Milnathort.

When he came in sight of the house, however, he became aware insensibly,
he could scarcely tell how, of some change in its aspect: what was it?
It was lighted up in the most unusual way. The window of the spare room
was shining not only with candlelight, but with firelight, his own room
was lighted up; the door was standing open, throwing out a warm flood of
light into the street, and in the centre of this light stood Mrs.
Methven with her white shawl over her head, not at all concealing
herself, gazing anxiously in the direction from which he was coming.

"I think I will send for him," he heard her say; "he has, very likely,
stepped into Captain Underwood's, and he is apt to meet friends there
who will not let him go."

Her voice was soft--there was no blame in it, though she was anxious.
She was speaking to some one behind her, a figure in a great coat.
Walter was in the shadow and invisible. He paused in his surprise to
listen.

"I must get away by the last train," he heard the voice of the muffled
figure say somewhat pettishly.

"Oh, there is plenty of time for that," cried his mother; and then she
gave a little cry of pleasure, and said, "And, at a good moment, here he
is!"

He came in somewhat dazzled, and much astonished, into the strong light
in the open doorway. Mrs. Methven's countenance was all radiant and
glowing with pleasure. She held out her hand to him eagerly.

"We have been looking for you," she cried; "I have had a great surprise.
Walter, this is Mr. Milnathort."

Puzzled, startled, and yet somewhat disappointed, Walter paused in the
hall, and looked at a tall old man with a face full of crotchets and
intelligence, who stood with two great coats unbuttoned, and a comforter
half unwound from his throat, under the lamp. His features were high and
thin, his eyes invisible under their deep sockets.

"Now, you will surely take off your coat, and consent to go up-stairs,
and make yourself comfortable," said Mrs. Methven, with a thrill of
excitement in her voice. "This is Walter. He has heard of you all his
life. Without any reference to the nature of your communication, he must
be glad, indeed, to make your acquaintance--"

She gave Walter a look of appeal as she spoke. He was so much surprised
that it was with difficulty he found self-possession to murmur a few
words of civility. A feeling that Mr. Milnathort must have come to look
after that letter which had never been written came in with the most
wonderfully confusing, half ludicrous effect into his mind, like one of
the inadequate motives and ineffable conclusions of a dream. Mr.
Milnathort made a stiff little bow in reply.

"I will remain till the last train. In the mean time the young gentleman
had better be informed, Mrs. Methven."

She put out her hands again. "A moment--give us a moment first."

The old lawyer stood still and looked from the mother to the son.
Perhaps to his keen eyes it was revealed that it would be well she
should have the advantage of any pleasant revelation.

"I will," he said, "madam, avail myself of your kind offer to go
up-stairs and unroll myself out of these trappings of a long journey;
and in the mean time you will, perhaps, like to tell him the news
yourself: he will like it all the better if he hears it from his
mother."

Mrs. Methven bowed her head, having, apparently, no words at her
command: and stood looking after him till he disappeared on the stairs,
following the maid, who had been waiting with a candle lighted in her
hand. When he was gone, she seized Walter hurriedly by the arm, and drew
him towards the little room, the nearest, which was his ordinary
sitting-room. Her hand grasped him with unnecessary force in her
excitement. The room was dark--he could not see her face, the only light
in it being the reflection of the lamp outside.

"Oh, Walter!" she cried; "oh, my boy! I don't know how to tell you the
news. This useless life is all over for you, and another--oh, how
different--another--God grant it happy and great, oh, God grant it!
blessed and noble!--"

Her voice choked with excitement and fast-coming tears. She drew him
towards her into her arms.

"It will take you from me--but what of that, if it makes you happy and
good? I have been no guide to you, but God will be your guide: His
leadings were all dark to me, but now I see--"

"Mother," he cried, with a strange impulse he could not understand,
putting his arm round her, "I did not write that letter: I have done
nothing I promised or meant to do. I am sick to the heart to think what
a fool and a cad I am--for the love of God tell me what it is!"




CHAPTER IV.


All Sloebury was aware next morning that something of the most
extraordinary character had happened to young Walter Methven. The rumour
even reached the club on the same evening. First the report was that he
had got a valuable appointment, at which the gentlemen shook their
heads; next that he had come into a fortune: they laughed with one
accord at this. Then, as upon a sudden gale of wind, there blew into the
smoking-room, then full of tobacco, newspapers, and men, a whisper which
made everybody turn pale. This was one reason, if not the chief, why
that evening was one of the shortest ever known at the club, which did
not indeed generally keep very late hours, but still was occupied by its
_habitués_ till ten or eleven o'clock, when the serious members would go
away, leaving only the boys, who never could have enough of it. But on
that evening even the young men cleared off about ten or so. They wanted
to know what it meant. Some of them went round to Captain Underwood's
where Walter was so often to be found, with a confidence that at least
Underwood would know; the more respectable members of society went home
to their families to spread the news, and half-a-dozen mothers at least
went to bed that night with a disagreeable recollection that they had
individually and deliberately "broken off" an incipient flirtation or
more, in which Walter had been one of the parties concerned. But the
hopeful ones said to themselves, "Lizzie has but to hold up her little
finger to bring him back." This was before the whole was known. The
young men who had hurried to Captain Underwood's were received by that
gentleman with an air of importance and of knowing more than he would
tell, which impressed their imaginations deeply. He allowed that he had
always known that there was a great deal of property, and perhaps a
title concerned, but declared that he was not at liberty to say any
more. Thus the minds of all were prepared for a great revelation; and it
is safe to say that from one end of Sloebury to the other Walter's name
was in everybody's mouth. It had been always believed that the Methvens
were people of good connections, and of later years it had been
whispered by the benevolent as a reason for Walter's inaction that he
had grand relations, who at the proper moment would certainly interfere
and set everything right for him. Others, however, were strenuous in
their denial and ridicule of this, asking, was his mother a woman to
conceal any advantages she had?--for they did not understand the kind of
pride in which Mrs. Methven was so strong. And then it was clear that
not only did the grand relations do nothing for Walter, but he did not
even have an invitation from them, and went from home only when his
mother went to the sea-side. Thus there was great doubt and wonder, and
in some quarters an inclination to treat the rumour as a canard, and to
postpone belief. At the same time everybody believed it, more or less,
at the bottom of their hearts, feeling that a thing so impossible must
be true.

But when it burst fully upon the world next morning along with the pale
November daylight, but much more startling, that Walter Methven had
succeeded as the next heir to his distant cousin, who was the head of
the family, and was now Lord Erradeen, a great potentate, with castles
in the Highlands and fat lands further south, and moors and deer forests
and everything that the heart of man could think of, the town was swept
not only by a thrill of wonder, but of emotion. Nobody was indifferent
to this extraordinary romance. Some, when they had got over the first
bewilderment, received it with delightful anticipations, as if the good
fortune which had befallen Walter was in some respects good fortune also
for themselves; whereas many others were almost angry at this sudden
elevation over their heads of one who certainly did not deserve any
better, if indeed half so well as they did. But nobody was indifferent.
It was the greatest excitement that had visited Sloebury for years--even
it might be said for generations. Lord Erradeen! it took away
everybody's breath.

Among the circle of Walter's more intimate acquaintance, the impression
made was still deeper, as may be supposed. The commotion in the mind of
the rector, who indeed was old enough to have taken it with more
placidity, was such that he hurried in from morning service without
taking off his cassock. He was a good Churchman, but not so far gone as
to walk about the world in that ecclesiastical garment.

"Can you imagine what has happened?" he said, bursting in upon Mrs.
Wynn, who was delicate and did not go to church in the winter mornings.
"Young Walter Methven, that you all made such a talk about----"

This was unfair, because she had never made any talk--being a woman who
did not talk save most sparingly. She was tempted for a moment to
forestall him by telling him she already knew, but her heart failed her,
and she only shook her head a little in protest against this calumny,
and waited smilingly for what he had to say. She could not take away
from him the pleasure of telling this wonderful piece of news.

"Why it was only the night before last he was here--most of us rather
disapproving of him, poor boy," said the rector. "Well, Lydia, that
young fellow that was a good-for-nothing, you know--doing nothing, never
exerting himself: well, my dear! the most extraordinary thing has
happened--the most wonderful piece of good fortune----"

"Don't keep me on tenterhooks, Julius; I have heard some buzzing of talk
already."

"I should think you had! the town is full of it; they tell me that
everybody you meet on the streets--Lydia!" said the rector with
solemnity, drawing close to her to make his announcement more imposing,
"that boy is no longer simple Mr. Walter Methven. He is Lord
Erradeen----"

"Lord what?" cried the old lady. It was part of her character to be a
little deaf, or rather hard of hearing, which is the prettier way of
stating the fact. It was supposed by some that this was one of the
reasons why, when any one was blamed, she always shook her head.

"Lord Er-ra-deen; but bless me, it is not the name that is so wonderful,
it is the fact. Lord Erradeen--a great personage--a man of importance.
You don't show any surprise, Lydia! and yet it is the most astonishing
incident without comparison that has happened in the parish these
hundred years."

"I wonder what his mother is thinking," Mrs. Wynn said.

"If her head is turned nobody could be surprised. Of course, like every
other mother, she thinks her son worthy of every exaltation."

"I wish she was of that sort," the old lady said.

"Every woman is of that sort," said the rector with hasty dogmatism;
"and, in one way, I am rather sorry, for it will make her feel she was
perfectly right in encouraging him, and that would be such a terrible
example for others. The young men will all take to idling----"

"But it is not the idling, but the fact that there is a peerage in the
family----"

"You can't expect," cried the rector, who was not lucid, "that boys or
women either will reason back so far as that. It will be a bad example:
and, in the mean time, it is a most astonishing fact. But you don't seem
in the least excited. I thought you would have jumped out of your
chair--out of the body almost."

"I am too rheumatic for that," said Mrs. Wynn with a smile: then, "I
wonder if she will come and tell me," the old lady said.

"I should think she does not know whether she is on her head or her
heels," cried the rector; "I don't feel very sure myself. And Walter!
What a change, to be sure, for that boy! I hope he will make a good use
of it. I hope he will not dart off with Underwood and such fellows and
make a fool of himself. Mind, I don't mean that I think so badly of
Underwood," he added after a moment, for this was a subject on which,
being mollified as previously mentioned, the rector took the male side
of the question. Mrs. Wynn received the protest in perfect silence, not
even shaking her head.

"But if he took a fancy for horses or that sort of thing," Mr. Wynn
added with a moment's hesitation; then he brightened up again--"of
course it is better that he should know somebody who has a little
experience in any case; and you will perceive, my dear, there is a
great difference between a penniless youth like Walter Methven getting
such notions in his head which lead only to ruin, and young Lord
Erradeen dabbling a little in amusements which, after all, have no harm
in them if not carried too far, and are natural in his rank--but you
women are always prejudiced on such a point."

"I did not say anything, my dear," the old lady said.

"Oh, no, you don't say anything," cried the rector fretfully, "but I see
it in every line of your shawl and every frill of your cap. You are just
stiff with prejudice so far as Underwood is concerned, who really is not
at all a bad fellow when you come to know him, and is always respectful
to religion, and shows a right feeling--but one might as well try to fly
as to convince you when you have taken a prejudice."

Mrs. Wynn made no protest against this. She said only, "It is a great
ordeal for a boy to pass through. I wonder if his mother----" And here
she paused, not having yet, perhaps, formulated into words the thoughts
that arose in her heart.

"It is to be hoped that she will let him alone," the rector said; "she
has indulged him in everything hitherto; but just now, when he is far
better left to himself, no doubt she will be wanting to interfere."

"Do you think she has indulged him in everything?" said the old lady;
but she did not think it necessary to accuse her husband of prejudice.
Perhaps he understood Captain Underwood as much better as she
understood Mrs. Methven; so she said nothing more. She was the only
individual in Sloebury who had any notion of the struggle in which
Walter's mother had wrecked so much of her own peace.

"There cannot be any two opinions on that subject," said the rector.
"Poor lad! You will excuse me, my dear, but I am always sorry for a boy
left to a woman's training. He is either a mere milksop or a
ne'er-do-well. Walter is not a milksop, and here has Providence stepped
in, in the most wonderful way, to save him from being the other: but
that is no virtue of hers. You will stand up, of course, for your own
side."

The old lady smiled and shook her head. "I think every child is the
better for having both its parents, Julius, if that is what you mean."

This was not exactly what he meant, but it took the wind out of the
rector's sails. "Yes, it is an ordeal for him," he said, "but, I am
sure, if my advice can do him any good, it is at his service; and,
though I have been out of the way of many things for some time, yet I
dare say the world is very much what it was, and I used to know it well
enough."

"He will ask for nobody's advice," said Mrs. Wynn.

"Which makes it all the more desirable he should have it," cried the
rector; and then he said, "Bless me! I have got my cassock on still.
Tell John to take it down to the vestry--though, by the way, there is a
button off, and you might as well have it put on for me, as it is
here."

Mrs. Wynn executed the necessary repair of the cassock with her own
hands. Though she was rheumatic, and did not care to leave her chair
oftener than was necessary, she had still the use of her hands, and she
had a respect for all the accessories of the clerical profession. She
was sitting examining the garment to see if any other feeblenesses were
apparent, in which a stitch in time might save after labours, when, with
a little eager tap at the door, another visitor came in. This was a
young lady of three or four and twenty, with a good deal of the beauty
which consists in fresh complexion and pleasant colour. Her hair was
light brown, warm in tone; her eyes were brown and sparkling; her cheeks
and lips bloomed with health. She had a pretty figure, full of life and
energy--everything, in short, that is necessary to make up a pretty
girl, without any real loveliness or deeper grace. She came in quickly,
brimming over, as was evident, with something which burst forth as soon
as she had given the old lady the hasty conventional kiss of greeting,
and which, as a matter of course, turned out to be the news of which
Sloebury was full.

"Did you ever hear anything so wonderful?" she said. "Walter Methven,
that nobody thought anything of--and now he is turned into a live lord!
a real peer of parliament! they say. I thought mamma would have fainted
when she heard it."

"Why should your mamma faint when she heard of it, July? It is very
pleasant news."

"Oh, Aunt Lydia! don't you know why? I am so angry: I feel as if I
should never speak to her again. Don't you remember? And I always
thought you had some hand in it. Oh, you sit there and look so innocent,
but that is because you are so deep."

"Am I deep?" the old lady asked with a smile.

"You are the deepest person I ever knew: you see through us all, and you
just throw in a word; and then, when people act upon it, you look so
surprised. I heard you myself remark to mamma how often Walter Methven
was at our house."

"Yes, I think I did remark it," Mrs. Wynn said.

"And what was the harm? He liked to come, and he liked me; and I hope
you don't think I am the sort of person to forget myself and think too
much about a man."

"I thought you were letting him be seen with you too often, July, that
is true."

"You thought it might keep others off that were more eligible? Well,
that is what I supposed you meant, for I never like to take a bad view.
But, you see, there was somebody that was eligible; and here has he
turned, all at once, into the very best match within a hundred miles. If
mamma had only let things alone, what prospects might be opening upon me
now!"

"Half-a-dozen girls, I am afraid, may say just the same," said Mrs.
Wynn.

"Well, what does that matter? He had nothing else to do. When a young
man has nothing to do he must be making up to somebody. I don't blame
him a bit; that is what makes us girls always ready for a flirtation.
Time hangs so heavy on our hands. And only think, Aunt Lydia, if things
had been allowed to go on (and I could always have thrown him off if
anything better turned up), only think what might have happened to me
now. I might be working a coronet in all my new handkerchiefs," cried
the girl: "only imagine! oh, oh, oh!"

And she pretended to cry; but there was a sparkle of nervous energy all
the same in her eyes, as if she were eager for the chase, and scarcely
able to restrain her impatience. Mrs. Wynn shook her head at her visitor
with a smile.

"You are not so worldly as you give yourself out to be," she said.

"Oh, that just shows how little you know. I am as worldly as ever woman
was. I think of nothing but how to establish myself, and have plenty of
money. We want it so! Oh, I know you are very good to us--both my uncle
and you; but mamma is extravagant, and I am extravagant, and naturally
all that anybody thinks of is to have what is necessary and decent for
us. We have to put up with it, but I hate what is necessary and decent.
I should like to go in satin and lace to-day even if I knew I should be
in rags to-morrow; and to think if you had not interfered that I might
have blazed in diamonds, and gone to court, and done everything I want
to do! I could strangle you, Aunt Lydia, and mamma too!" Upon which Miss
July (or Julée, which was how her name was pronounced) gave Mrs. Wynn a
sudden kiss and took the cassock out of her hands. "If it wants any
mending I will do it," she said; "it will just give me a little
consolation for the moment. And you will have time to think and answer
this question: Is it too late now?"

"July, dear, it hurts me to hear you talk so--you are not so wild as you
take credit for being."

"I am not wild at all, Aunt Lydia," said the girl, appropriating Mrs.
Wynn's implements, putting on her thimble, threading her needle, and
discovering at one glance the little rent in the cassock which the old
lady had been searching for in vain, "except with indignation to think
what I have lost--if I have lost it. It is all very well to speak, but
what is a poor girl to do? Yes, I know, to make just enough to live on
by teaching, or something of that sort; but that is not what I want. I
want to be well off. I am so extravagant, and so is mamma. We keep
ourselves down, we don't spend money; but we hate it so! I would go
through a great many disagreeables if I could only have enough to
spend."

"And is Walter one of the disagreeables you would go through?"

"Well, no; I could put up with him very well. He is not at all
unpleasant. I don't want him, but I could do with him. Do you really
think it is too late? Don't you think mamma might call upon Mrs. Methven
and say how delighted we are; and just say to him, you know, in a
playful way (mamma could manage that very well), 'We cannot hope to see
you now in our little house, Lord Erradeen!' and then of course he would
be piqued (for he's very generous), and say, 'Why?' And mamma would say,
'Oh, we are such poor little people, and you are now a great man.' Upon
which, as sure as fate, he would be at the Cottage the same evening. And
then!" July threw back her head, and expanded her brown eyes with a
conscious power and sense of capability, as who should say--Then it
would be in my own hands.--"Don't you think that's very good for a
plan?" she added, subsiding quickly to the work, which she executed as
one to the manner born.

"I don't think anything of it as a plan--and neither do you; and your
mother would not do it, July," the old lady said.

"Ah," said July, throwing back her head, "there you have hit the blot,
Aunt Lydia. Mamma wouldn't do it! She could, you know. When she likes
she is the completest humbug!--but not always. And she has so many
notions about propriety, and what is womanly, and so forth--just like
you. Poor women have no business with such luxuries. I tell her we must
be of our time, and all that sort of thing; but she won't see it. No, I
am afraid that is just the difficulty. It all depends on mamma--and
mamma won't. Well, it is a little satisfaction to have had it all out
with you. If you had not interfered, you two, and stopped the poor boy
coming----"

At this juncture John threw open the door, and with a voice which he
reserved for the great county ladies, announced "Mrs. Methven." John had
heard the great news too.

"--Stopped the poor boy coming," July said. The words were but half out
of her mouth when John opened the door, and it was next to impossible
that the new visitor had not heard them. A burning blush covered the
girl's face. She sprang to her feet with the cassock in her arms, and
gazed at the new comer. Mrs. Methven for the first moment did not notice
this third person. She came in with the content and self-absorption of
one who has a great wonder to tell. The little world of Sloebury and all
its incidents were as nothing to her. She went up to old Mrs. Wynn with
a noiseless swiftness.

"I have come to tell you great news," she said.

"Let me look at you," said the old lady. "I have heard, and I scarcely
could believe it. Then it is all true?"

"I am sorry I was not the first to tell you. I think such a thing must
get into the air. Nobody went out from my house last night, and yet
everybody knows. I saw even the people in the street looking at me as I
came along. Mrs. Wynn, you always stood up for him; I never said
anything, but I know you did. I came first to you. Yes, it is all true."

The old lady had known it now for several hours, and had been gently
excited, no more. Now her eyes filled with tears, she could not have
told why.

"Dear boy! I hope God will bless him, and make him worthy and great,"
she said, clasping her old hands together. "He has always been a
favourite with me."

"He is a favourite with everybody," said July. No one had noticed her
presence, and she was not one that could remain unseen. "Everybody is
glad; there is not one that doesn't wish him well."

Did she intend to strike that _coup_ for herself which her mother was
not to be trusted to make? Mrs. Wynn thought so with a great tremor, and
interrupted her in a tone that for her was hurried and anxious.

"July speaks nothing but the truth, Mrs. Methven; there is nobody that
does not like Walter; but I suppose I ought now to drop these
familiarities and call him Lord Erradeen?"

"He will never wish his old friends to do that," said Mrs. Methven. She
already smiled with a gracious glance and gesture: and the feeling that
these old friends were almost too much privileged in being so near to
him, and admitted to such signs of friendship, came into her mind; but
she did not care to have July share her expansion. "Miss Herbert," she
said, with a little bow, "is very good to speak so kindly. But everybody
is kind. I did not know my boy was so popular. Sunshine," she added,
with a smile, "brings out all the flowers."

She had not sat down, and she evidently did not mean to do so while July
remained. There was something grand in her upright carriage, in her air
of superiority, which had never been apparent before. She had always
been a woman, as Sloebury people said, who thought a great deal of
herself; but no one had ever acknowledged her right to do so till now.
On the other hand, July Herbert was well used to the cold shade. Her
mother was Mrs. Wynn's niece, but she was none the less poor for that,
and as July was not a girl to be easily put down, she was acquainted
with every manner of polite snubbing known in the society of the place.
This of standing till she should go was one with which she was perfectly
familiar, and in many cases it afforded her pleasure to subject the
operator to great personal inconvenience; but on the present occasion
she was not disposed to exercise this power. She would have conciliated
Walter's mother if she could have done so, and on a rapid survey of the
situation she decided that the best plan was to yield.

"I must go and tell mamma the great news," she said. "I am sure she will
never rest till she rushes to you with her congratulations; but I will
tell her you are tired of congratulations already--for of course it is
not a thing upon which there can be two opinions." July laid down the
cassock as she spoke. "I have mended all there is to mend, Aunt Lydia;
you need not take any more trouble about it. Good-bye for the moment.
You may be sure you will see one or other of us before night."

They watched her silently as she went out of the room. Mrs. Methven
saying nothing till the door had closed, Mrs. Wynn with a deprecatory
smile upon her face. She did not altogether approve of her grandniece.
But neither was she willing to hand her over to blame. The old lady felt
the snub July had received more than the girl herself did. She looked a
little wistfully after her. She was half angry when as soon as July
disappeared Mrs. Methven sank down upon a chair near her, huge billows
of black silk rising about her, for she had put on her best gown. Mrs.
Wynn thought that the mother, whose child, disapproved by the world, had
been thus miraculously lifted above its censures, should have been all
the more tolerant of the other who had met no such glorious fate. But
she reflected that _they never see it_, which was her favourite
expression of wonderment, yet explanation of everything. There were so
many things that _they_ ought to learn by; but they never saw it. It was
thus she accounted with that shake of her head for all the errors of
mankind.

Mrs. Methven for her part waited till even the very step of that
objectionable Julia Herbert had died away. She had known by instinct
that if _that_ girl should appear she would be on the watch to make
herself agreeable to Walter's mother. "As if he could ever have thought
of her," she said to herself. Twenty-four hours before Mrs. Methven
would have been glad to think that Walter "thought of" any girl who was
at all in his own position. She would have hailed it as a means of
steadying him, and making him turn seriously to his life. But everything
was now changed, and this interruption had been very disagreeable. She
could scarcely turn to her old friend now with the effusion and emotion
which had filled her when she came in. She held out her hand and grasped
that of the old lady.

"I don't need to tell you what I am feeling," she said. "It is all like
a tumultuous sea of wonder and thankfulness. I wanted it, for I was at
my wits' end."

Mrs. Wynn was a little chilled too, but she took the younger woman's
hand.

"You did not know what was coming," she said. "You wanted one thing, and
Providence was preparing another."

"I don't know if that is how to state it; but at all events I was
getting to feel that I could not bear it any longer, and trying for any
way of setting things right: when the good came in this superlative way.
I feel frightened when I think of it. After we knew last night I could
do nothing but cry. It took all the strength from me. You would have
thought it was bad news."

"I can understand that." The old lady relinquished the hand which she
had been holding. "To be delivered from any anxieties you may have had
in such a superlative way, as you say, is not the common lot--most of us
have just to fight them out."

Mrs. Methven already felt herself far floated away from those that had
to fight it out. The very words filled her heart with an elation beyond
speech.

"And this morning," she said, "to wake and to feel it must be folly, and
then to realise that it was true! One knows so well the other sort of
waking when the shock and the pang come all over again. But to wake up
to this extraordinary incredible well-being--one might say happiness!"

The tears of joy were in her eyes, and in those tears there is something
so strange, so rare, that the soul experienced in life looks upon them
almost with more awe than upon the familiar ones of grief which we see
every day. The old lady melted, and her chill of feeling yielded to a
tender warmth. Yet what a pity that They never see it! How much more
perfect it would have been if the woman in her happiness had been
softened and kind to all those whom nothing had happened to!
Imperceptibly the old lady in her tolerant experience shook her gentle
old head. Then she gave herself in full sympathy to hear all the
wonderful details.




CHAPTER V.


The sentiments of the spectators in such a grand alteration of fortune
may be interesting enough, and it is in general more easy to get at them
than at those which fill the mind of the principal actor. In the present
case it is better to say of the principal subject of the change, for
Walter could not be said to be an actor at all. The emotions of the
first evening it would indeed be impossible to describe. To come in from
his small country-town society, to whom even he was so far inferior that
every one of them had facilities of getting and spending money which he
did not possess, and to sit down, all tremulous and guilty, feeling
himself the poorest creature, opposite to the serious and important
personage who came to tell him, with documents as solemn as himself,
that this silly youth who had been throwing away his life for nothing,
without even the swell of excitement to carry him on, had suddenly
become, without deserving it, without doing anything to bring it about,
an individual of the first importance--a peer, a proprietor, a great
man. Walter could have sobbed as his mother did, had not pride kept him
back. When they sat down at table in the little dining-room there were
two at least of the party who ate nothing, who sat and gazed at each
other across the others with white faces and blazing eyes. Mr.
Milnathort made a good dinner, and sat very watchful, making also his
observations, full of curiosity and a certain half-professional
interest. But Cousin Sophy was the only one who really got the good of
this prodigious event. She asked if they might not have some champagne
to celebrate the day. She was in high excitement but quite
self-controlled, and enjoyed it thoroughly. She immediately began in her
thoughts to talk of my young cousin Lord Erradeen. It was a delightful
advancement which would bring her no advantage, and yet almost pleased
her more than so much added on to her income; for Miss Merivale was not
of any distinction in her parentage, and suddenly to find herself cousin
to a lord went to her heart: it was a great benefit to the solitary lady
fond of society, and very eager for a helping hand to aid her up the
ascent. And it was she who kept the conversation going. She even flirted
a little, quite becomingly, with the old lawyer, who felt her, it was
evident, a relief from the high tension of the others, and was amused by
the vivacious middle-aged lady, who for the moment had everything her
own way. After dinner there was a great deal of explanation given, and a
great many facts made clear, but it is to be doubted whether Walter knew
very well what was being said. He listened with an air of attention,
but it was as if he were listening to some fairy tale. Something out of
the _Arabian Nights_ was being repeated before him. He was informed how
the different branches of his family had died out one after another.
"Captain Methven was aware that he was in the succession," the lawyer
said; and Mrs. Methven cast a thought back, half-reproachful,
half-approving upon her husband, who had been dead so long that his
words and ways were like shadows to her, which she could but faintly
recall. Would it have been better if he had told her? After pursuing
this thought a long time she decided that it would not, that he had done
wisely--yet felt a little visionary grudge and disappointment to think
that he had been able to keep such a secret from her. No doubt it was
all for the best. She might have distracted herself with hopes, and worn
out her mind with waiting. It was doubtful if the support of knowing
what was going to happen would really have done her any good; but yet it
seemed a want of trust in her, it seemed even to put her in a partially
ridiculous position now, as knowing nothing, not having even an idea of
what was coming. But Walter did not share any of these goings back upon
the past. He had scarcely known his father, nor was he old enough to
have had such a secret confided to him for long after Captain Methven
died. He thought nothing of that. He sat with an appearance of the
deepest attention, but unaware of what was being said, with a vague
elation in his mind, something that seemed to buoy him up above the
material earth. He could not bring himself down again. It was what he
remembered to have felt when he was a child when some long-promised
pleasure was coming--to-morrow. Even in that case hindrances might come
in. It might rain to-morrow, or some similar calamity might occur. But
rain could not affect this. He sat and listened and did not hear a word.

Next morning Walter awoke very early, before the wintry day had fully
dawned. He opened his eyes upon a sort of paling and whitening of
everything--a grey perception of the walls about him, and the lines of
the window marked upon the paleness outside. What was it that made even
these depressing facts exhilarate him and rouse an incipient delight in
his mind, which for the moment he did not understand? Then he sat up
suddenly in his bed. It was cold, it was dark. There was no assiduous
servant to bring hot water or light his fire--everything was chilling
and wretched; and he was not given to early rising. Ordinarily it was an
affair of some trouble to get him roused, to see that he was in time for
a train or for any early occupation. But this morning he found it
impossible to lie still; an elasticity in him, an elation and buoyancy,
which he almost felt, with a laugh, might float him up to the ceiling,
like the mediums, made him jump up, as it were in self-defence. It
buoyed him, it carried him as on floating pinions into a limitless
heaven. What was it? Who was he? The chill of the morning brought him a
little to himself, and then he sat down in his shirt-sleeves and
delivered himself up to the incredible, and laughed low and long, with a
sense of the impossibility of it that brought tears to his eyes. He Lord
Erradeen, Lord Anything! He a peer, a great man! he with lands and money
and wealth of every sort, who last night had been pleased to win two
sixpences! After the buoyancy and sensation of rising beyond the world
altogether, which was a kind of physical consciousness of something
great that had happened before he was awake, came this sense of the
ludicrous, this incredulity and confused amusement. He dressed himself
in this mood, laughing low from time to time, to himself, as if it were
some game which was being played upon him, but of which he was in the
secret, and not to be deceived, however artfully it might be managed.
But when he was dressed and ready to go down-stairs--by which time
daylight had fully struggled forth upon a wet and clammy world--he
stopped himself short with a sudden reminder that to-day this curious
practical joke was to extend its career and become known to the world.
He laughed again, but then he grew grave, standing staring at the closed
door of his bedroom, out of which he was about to issue--no longer a
nobody--in a new character, to meet the remarks, the congratulations of
his friends. He knew that the news would fly through the little town
like lightning; that people would stop each other in the streets and
ask, "Have you heard it?--is it true?" and that throughout the whole
place there would be a sort of revolution, a general change of
positions, which would confuse the very world. He knew vaguely that
whatever else might happen he would be uppermost. The people who had
disapproved of him, and treated him _de haut en bas_, would find this to
be impossible any longer. He would be in a position which is to be seen
on the stage and in books more frequently than in common life--possessed
of the power of making retribution, of punishing the wicked, and
distributing to the good tokens of his favour. It is a thing we would
all like to do, to avenge ourselves (within due Christian and social
limits) on the persons who have despised us, and to reward those who
have believed in us, showing the one how right they were, and the other
how wrong they were, with a logic that should be undeniable. There is
nobody who has ever endured a snub--and who has not?--who would not
delight in doing this; but the most of us never get such a supreme
gratification, and Walter was to have it. He was going to see everybody
abashed and confounded who had ever treated him with contumely. Once
more he felt that sensation of buoyancy and elation as if he were
spurning earth with his foot and ready to soar into some sort of
celestial sphere. And then once more he laughed to himself. Was it
possible? could it be? would anybody believe it? He thought there would
be an explosion of incredulous laughter through all the streets; but
then, when that was over, both friends and foes would be forced to
believe it--as he himself was forced to believe.

With that he opened his door, and went down-stairs into the new world.
He stumbled over the housemaid's pail, of course, but did not call forth
any frown upon that functionary's freckled forehead as he would have
done yesterday. On the contrary, she took away the pail, and begged his
pardon with awe--being of course entirely blameless. He paused for a
moment on the steps as he faced the raw morning air going out, and lo!
the early baker, who was having a word with cook at the area over the
rolls, turned towards him with a reverential look, and pulled off his
cap. These were the first visible signs of Walter's greatness; they gave
him a curious sort of conviction that after all the thing was true.

There was scarcely anybody about the Sloebury streets except bakers and
milkmen at this hour. It was a leisurely little town, in which nothing
particular was doing, no manufactures or business to demand early hours;
and the good people did not get up early. Why should they? the day was
long enough without that: so that Walter met no one in his early
promenade. But before he got back there were symptoms that the
particular baker who had taken off his cap had whispered the news to
others of his fraternity, who, having no tie of human connection, such
as supplying the family with rolls, to justify a salutation, only
stared at him with awe-stricken looks as he went past. He felt he was
an object of interest even to the policeman going off duty, who being an
old soldier, saluted with a certain grandeur as he tramped by. The young
man took an aimless stroll through the half-awakened district. The roads
were wet, the air raw: it was not a cheerful morning; damp and
discouragement breathed in the air; the little streets looked squalid
and featureless in shabby British poverty; lines of low, two-storied
brick, all commonplace and monotonous. It was the sort of morning to
make you think of the tediousness to which most people get up every day,
supposing it to be life, and accepting it as such with the dull content
which knows no better; a life made up of scrubbing out of kitchens and
sweeping out of parlours, of taking down shutters and putting them up
again; all sordid, petty, unbroken by an exhilarating event. But this
was not what struck Walter as he floated along in his own wonderful
atmosphere, seeing nothing, noting everything with the strange vision of
excitement. Afterwards he recollected with extraordinary vividness a man
who stood stretching his arms in shirt sleeves above his head for a
long, soul-satisfying yawn, and remembered to have looked up at the
shop-window within which he was standing, and read the name of Robinson
in gilt letters. Robinson, yawning in his shirt-sleeves, against a
background of groceries, pallid in the early light, remained with him
like a picture for many a day.

When he got back the breakfast table was spread, and his mother taking
her place at it. Mr. Milnathort had not gone away as he intended by the
night train. He had remained in Mrs. Methven's spare room, surrounded by
all the attentions and civilities that a household of women, regarding
him with a sort of awe as a miraculous messenger or even creator of good
fortune, could show to a bachelor gentleman, somewhat prim and
old-fashioned in his habits and ways. It was his intention to leave
Sloebury by the eleven o'clock train, and he had arranged that Walter
should meet him in Edinburgh within a week, to be made acquainted with
several family matters, in which, as the head of the house, it was
necessary that he should be fully instructed. Neither Walter nor his
mother paid very much attention to these arrangements, nor even remarked
that the old lawyer spoke of them with great gravity. Mrs. Methven was
busy making tea, and full of anxiety that Mr. Milnathort should
breakfast well and largely, after what she had always understood to be
the fashion of his country; and as for Walter, he was not in a state of
mind to observe particularly any such indications of manner. Cousin
Sophia was the only one who remarked the solemnity of his tone and
aspect.

"One would suppose there was some ordeal to go through," she said in her
vivacious way.

"A young gentleman who is taking up a large fortune and a great
responsibility will have many ordeals to go through, madam," Mr.
Milnathort said in his deliberate tones: but he did not smile or take
any other notice of her archness. It was settled accordingly, that after
a few days for preparation and leave-taking, young Lord Erradeen should
leave Sloebury. "And if I might advise, alone," Mr. Milnathort said,
"the place is perhaps not just in a condition to receive ladies. I would
think it wiser on the whole, madam, if you deferred your coming till his
lordship there has settled everything for your reception."

"_My_ coming?" said Mrs. Methven. The last twelve hours had made an
extraordinary difference in her feelings and faith; but still she had
not forgotten what had gone before, nor the controversies and struggles
of the past. "We must leave all that for after consideration," she said.

Walter was about to speak impulsively, but old Milnathort stopped him
with a skilful interruption--

"It will perhaps be the wisest way," he said; "there will be many things
to arrange. When Lord Erradeen has visited the property, and understands
everything about it, then he will be able to----"

Walter heard the name at first with easy unconsciousness: then it
suddenly blazed forth upon him as his own name. His mother at the other
end of the table felt the thrill of the same sensation. Their eyes met;
and all the wonder of this strange new life suddenly gleamed upon them
with double force. It is true that the whole condition of their minds
was affected by this revelation, that there was nothing about them that
was not full of it, and that they were actually at this moment
discussing the business connected with it. Still it all came to life now
as at the first moment at the sound of this name, Lord Erradeen! Walter
could not help laughing to himself over his coffee.

"I can't tell who you mean," he said. "You must wait a little until I
realise what Walter Methven has got to do with it."

Mrs. Methven thought that this was making too much of the change. She
already wished to believe, or at least to persuade Mr. Milnathort to
believe, that she was not so very much surprised after all.

"Lord Erradeen," she said, "is too much amused at present with having
got a new name to take the change very seriously."

"He will soon learn the difference, madam," said Mr. Milnathort.
"Property is a thing that has always to be taken seriously: and of all
property the Erradeen lands. There are many things connected with them
that he will have to set his face to in a way that will be far from
amusing."

The old lawyer had a very grave countenance--perhaps it was because he
was a Scotchman. He worked through his breakfast with a steady routine
that filled the ladies with respect. First fish, then kidneys, then a
leg of the partridge that had been left from dinner last night; finally
he looked about the table with an evident sense of something wanting,
and though he declared that it was of no consequence, avowed at last,
with some shyness, that it was the marmalade for which he was looking:
and there was none in the house! Mr. Milnathort was full of excuses for
having made such a suggestion. It was just a Scotch fashion he declared;
it was of no consequence. Mrs. Methven, who held an unconscious
conviction that it was somehow owing to him that Walter had become Lord
Erradeen, was made quite unhappy by the omission.

"I shall know better another time," she said regretfully. They were all
still under the impression more or less that it was his doing. He was
not a mere agent to them, but the god, out of the machinery, who had
turned darkness into light. He justified this opinion still more fully
before he went away, putting into Walter's hand a cheque-book from a
London bank, into which a sum of money which seemed to the inexperienced
young man inexhaustible, had been paid to his credit. The old gentleman
on his side seemed half-embarrassed, half-impatient after a while by the
attention shown him. He resisted when Walter declared his intention of
going to the railway to see him off.

"That is just a reversal of our positions," he said.

At this Mrs. Methven became a little anxious, fearing that perhaps
Walter's simplicity might be going too far. She gave him a word of
warning when the cab drove up for Mr. Milnathort's bag. It was not a
very large one, and Walter was quite equal to the condescension of
carrying it to the station if his mother had not taken that precaution.
She could not make up her mind that he was able to manage for himself.

"You must remember that after all he is only your man of business," she
said, notwithstanding all the worship she had herself been paying to
this emissary of fortune. It was a relief to shake hands with him, to
see him drive away from the door, leaving behind him such an amazing,
such an incalculable change. Somehow it was more easy to realise it when
he was no longer there. And this was what Walter felt when he walked
away from the railway, having seen with great satisfaction the grizzled
head of the old Scotsman nod at him from a window of the departing
train. The messenger was gone; the thing which he had brought with him,
did that remain? Was it conceivable that it was now fixed and certain
not to be affected by anything that could be done or said? Walter walked
steadily enough along the pavement, but he did not think he was doing
so. The world around him swam in his eyes once more. He could not make
sure that he was walking on solid ground, or mounting up into the air.
How different it was from the way in which he had come forth yesterday,
idle, half-guilty, angry with himself and everybody, yet knowing very
well what to do, turning with habitual feet into the way where all the
other idlers congregated, knowing who he should meet and what would
happen. He was separated from all that as if by an ocean. He had no
longer anything to do with these foolish loungers. His mother had told
him a thousand times in often varied tones that they were not companions
for him; to-day he recognised the fact with a certain disgust. He felt
it more strongly still when he suddenly came across Captain Underwood
coming up eagerly with outstretched hands.

"I hope I am the first to congratulate you, Lord Erradeen," he said.
"Now you will know why I asked you yesterday, Was there any news----"

"Now I shall know? I don't a bit; what do you mean? Do you mean me to
believe that _you_ had any hand in it?" Walter cried, with a tone of
mingled incredulity and disdain.

"No hand in it, unless I had helped to put the last poor dear lord out
of the way. I could scarcely have had that; but if you mean did I know
about it, I certainly did, as you must if you had been a little more in
the world."

"Why didn't you tell me then?" said Walter. He added somewhat hotly,
with something of the sublime assumption of youth: "Waiting for a man to
die would never have suited me. I much prefer to have been, as you say,
out of the world----"

"Oh, Lord! I didn't mean to offend you," said the captain. "Don't get on
a high horse. Of course, if you'd known your Debrett as I do, you would
have seen the thing plain enough. However, we needn't quarrel about it.
I have always said you were my pupil, and I hope I have put you up to a
few things that will be of use on your entry into society."

"Have you?" said Walter. He could not think how he had ever for a moment
put up with this under-bred person. Underwood stood before him with a
sort of jaunty rendering of the appeal with which grooms and people
about the stable remind a young man of what in his boyish days they have
done for him--an appeal which has its natural issue in a sovereign. But
he could not give Underwood a sovereign, and it was perhaps just a
little ungenerous to turn in the first moment of his prosperity from a
man who, from whatever purpose, had been serviceable to him in his
poverty. He said, with an attempt to be more friendly: "I know,
Underwood, you have been very kind."

"Oh, by Jove! kind isn't the word. I knew you'd want a bit of training;
the best thoroughbred that ever stepped wants that; and if I can be of
any use to you in the future, I will. I knew old Erradeen; I've known
all about the family for generations. There are a great many curious
things about it, but I think I can help you through them," said the
captain with a mixture of anxiety and swagger. There had always been
something of this same mixture about him, but Walter had never been
fully conscious what it was till now.

"Thank you," he said; "perhaps it will be better to let that develop
itself in a natural way. I am going to Scotland in a week, and then I
shall have it at first hand."

"Then I can tell you beforehand you will find a great many things you
won't like," said Underwood, abruptly. "It is not for nothing that a
family gets up such a reputation. I know two or three of your places.
Mulmorrel, and the shooting-box on Loch Etive, and that mysterious old
place at Kinloch-houran. I have been at every one of them. It was not
everybody, I can tell you, that old Erradeen would have taken to that
place. Why, there is a mystery at every corner. There is----"

Walter held up his hand to stay this torrent. He coloured high with a
curious sentiment of proprietorship and the shrinking of pride from
hearing that which was his discussed by strangers. He scarcely knew the
names of them, and their histories not at all. He put up his hand: "I
would rather find out the mysteries for myself," he said.

"Oh," cried Underwood, "if you are standing on your dignity, my lord, as
you like, for that matter. I am not one to thrust my company upon any
man if he doesn't like it. I have stood your friend, and I would again;
but as for forcing myself upon you now that you've come to your
kingdom----"

"Underwood," cried the other, touched in the tenderest point, "if you
dare to insinuate that this has changed me, I desire never to speak to
you again. But it is only, I suppose, one of the figures of speech that
people use when they are angry. I am not such a cad as you make me out.
Whether my name is Methven or Erradeen--I don't seem to know very well
which it is----"

"It is both," the other cried with a great laugh, and they shook hands,
engaging to dine together at the hotel that evening. Underwood, who was
knowing in such matters, was to order the dinner, and two or three of
"the old set," were to be invited. It would be a farewell to his former
comrades, as Walter intended; and with a curious recurrence of his first
elation he charged his representative to spare no expense. There was
something intoxicating and strange in the very phrase.

As he left Underwood and proceeded along the High Street, where, if he
had not waved his hand to them in passing with an air of haste and
pre-occupation, at least every second person he met would have stopped
him to wish him joy, he suddenly encountered July Herbert. She was going
home from the vicarage, out of which his mother had politely driven her;
and it seemed the most wonderful luck to July to get him to herself,
thus wholly unprotected, and with nobody even to see what she was after.
She went up to him, not with Underwood's eagerness, but with a pretty
frank pleasure in her face.

"I have heard a fairy tale," she said, "and it is true----"

"I suppose you mean about me," said Walter. "Yes, I am afraid it is
true. I don't exactly know who I am at present."

"Afraid!" cried July. "Ah, you know you don't mean that. At all events,
you are no longer just the old Walter whom we have known all our lives."

There was another girl with her whom Walter knew but slightly, but who
justified the plural pronoun.

"On the contrary, I was going to say, when you interrupted me----"

"I am so sorry I interrupted you."

"That though I did not know who I was in the face of the world, I was
always the old Walter, &c. A man, I believe, can never lose his
Christian name."

"Nor a woman either," said July. "That is the only thing that cannot be
taken from us. We are supposed, you know, rather to like the loss of the
other one."

"I have heard so," said Walter, who was not unaccustomed to this sort of
fencing. "But I suppose it is not true."

"Oh," said July, "if it were for the same reason that makes you change
your name, I should not mind. But there is no peerage in our family that
I know of, and I should not have any chance if there were, alas!
Good-bye, Lord Erradeen. It is a lovely name! And may I always speak to
you when I meet you, though you are such a grand personage? We do not
hope to see you at the Cottage now, but mamma will like to know that you
still recognise an old friend."

"I shall come and ask Mrs. Herbert what she thinks of it all," Walter
said.

July's brown eyes flashed out with triumph as she laughed and waved her
hand to him. She said--

"It will be too great an honour," and curtseyed; then laughed again as
she went on, casting a glance at him over her shoulder.

He laughed too; he was young, and he was gratified even by this
undisguised provocation, though he could not help saying to himself,
with a slight beat of his heart, how near he was to falling in love with
that girl! What a good thing it was that he did not--_now_!

As for July, she looked at him with a certain ferocity, as if she would
have devoured him. To think of all that boy had it in his power to give
if he pleased, and to think how little a poor girl could do!




CHAPTER VI.


Mrs. Methven was conscious of a new revival of the old displeasure when
Walter informed her of the engagement he had formed for the evening. She
was utterly disappointed. She had thought that the great and beneficial
shock of this new life would turn his character altogether, and convert
him into that domestic sovereign, that object of constant reference,
criticism, and devotion which every woman would have every man be. It
was a wonderful mortification and enlightenment to find that without
even the interval of a single evening devoted to the consideration of
his new and marvellous prospects, and that talking over which is one of
the sweetest parts of a great and happy event, he should return--to
what?--to wallowing in the mire, as the Scripture says, to his old
billiard-room acquaintances, the idlers and undesirable persons with
whom he had formed associations. Could there be anything more unsuitable
than Lord Erradeen in the midst of such a party, with Underwood, and
perhaps worse than Underwood. It wounded her pride and roused her
temper, and, in spite of all her efforts, it was with a lowering brow
that she saw him go away. Afterwards, indeed, when she thought of it, as
she did for hours together, while cousin Sophia talked, and she
languidly replied, maintaining a conversation from the lips outward, so
poor a substitute for the evening's talking over and happy consultation
she had dreamed of--Mrs. Methven was more just to her son. She tried
always to be just, poor lady. She placed before herself all the reasons
for his conduct. That he should entertain the men who, much against her
wish and his own good, yet in their way had been kind to and entertained
him, was natural. But to do it this first evening was hard, and she
could not easily accept her disappointment. Afterwards she reminded
herself with a certain stern philosophy that because Walter had owned a
touch of natural emotion, and had drawn near to her and confessed
himself in the wrong, that was no reason why his character should be
changed in a moment. There were numbers of men who on occasion felt and
lamented their misdoing, yet went on again in the same way. He had been
no doubt startled, as some are by calamity, by the more extraordinary
shock of this good fortune; but why should he for that abandon all the
tastes and occupations of his former life? It was she, she said to
herself, with some bitterness, who was a fool. The fact was that Walter
meant no harm at all, and that it was merely the first impulse of a
half-scornful liberality, impatience of the old associations, which he
had tacitly acknowledged were not fit for him, that led him back to his
former companions. He felt afterwards that it would have been in better
taste had he postponed this for a night. But he was very impatient and
eager to shake himself free of them, and enter upon his new career.

Something of the same disappointed and disapproving sentiment filled
Mrs. Methven's mind when she heard of his visit to the Cottage. She knew
no reason why he should take a special leave of July Herbert; if he knew
himself a reason, which he did not disclose, that was another matter.
Thoughts like this embittered the preparations for his departure, which
otherwise would have been so agreeable. She had to see after many things
which a young man of more wealth, or more independent habits, would have
done for himself--his linen, his portmanteau, most of the things he
wanted, except the tailor part of the business; but it was not until the
last evening that there was any of the confidential consultation, for
which her heart had longed. Even on that last day Walter had been very
little indoors. He had been busy with a hundred trifles, and she had
begun to make up her mind to his going away without a word said as to
their future relations, as to whether he meant his mother to share any
of the advantages of his new position, or to drop her at Sloebury as
something done with, which he did not care to burden himself with, any
more than the other circumstances of his past career. She did so little
justice to the real generosity of her son's temper in the closeness of
her contest with him, and the heat of personal feeling, that she had
begun to make up her mind to this, with what pain and bitterness it is
unnecessary to say.

She had even began to make excuses for her own desertion in the tumult
of endless thought upon this one subject which possessed her. She would
be just; after all, was it not better perhaps that she should be left in
the little house which was her independent home, for which she owed
nothing to any one? If any unnecessary sense of gratitude made him offer
her reluctantly a share in his new life, that would be humiliation
indeed. If, as was apparent, her society, her advice, her love were
nothing to him, was it not far better that both should recognise the
situation, and view things in their true light? This the proud woman had
made up her mind to, with what depth of wounded tenderness and
embittered affection who could say? She had packed for him with her own
hands, for all his permanent arrangements were to be made after he had
left Sloebury, and to change her household in consequence of an
alteration of fortune which, according to all appearances, would not
concern her, was, she had proudly decided, quite out of the question.
She packed for him as in the days when he was going to school, when he
was a boy, and liked everything better that had been done by his mother.
A woman may be pardoned for feeling such a difference with a passionate
soreness and sense of downfall. In those days how she had thought of the
time when he would be grown up, when he would understand all her
difficulties and share all her cares, and in his own advancement make
her triumphant and happy! God forgive me, she said to herself, now he
has got advancement far above my hopes, and I am making myself wretched
thinking of myself. She stopped and cried a little over his new linen.
No, he was right; if it must be allowed that they did not "get on," it
was indeed far better in the long run that there should be no false
sentiment, no keeping up of an untenable position. Thank God she
required nothing; she had enough; she wanted neither luxury nor
grandeur, and her home, her natural place was here, where she had lived
so many years, where she could disarm all comment upon Walter's neglect
of her, by saying that she preferred the place where she had lived so
long, and where she had so many friends. Why, indeed, should she change
her home at her time of life? No doubt he would come back some time and
see her; but after all why should her life be unsettled because his was
changed? It was he who showed true sense in his way of judging the
matter, she said to herself with a smile, through the hastily dried and
momentary tears.

Walter came in when the packing was just about concluded. He came half
way up the stairs and called "Mother, where are you?" as he had often
done when he was a boy and wanted her at every turn, but as he never did
now. This touched and weakened her again in her steady resolution to
let him see no repining in her. "Are you packing for me?" he called out
again; "what a shame while I have been idling! But come down, mother,
please, and leave that. You forget we have everything to settle yet."

"What is there to settle?" she said, with a certain sharpness of tone
which she could not quite suppress, coming out upon the landing. The
maids who were going to bed, and who heard all this, thought it was
beautiful to hear his lordship speaking like that, quite natural to his
mother; but that missus was that hard it was no wonder if they didn't
get on; and Cousin Sophia from her virgin retirement, where she sat in
her dressing-gown reading a French novel, and very much alive to every
sound, commented in her own mind, closing her book, in the same sense.
"Now she will just go and hold him at arm's length while the boy's heart
is melting, and then break her own," Miss Merivale said to herself. Thus
everybody was against her and in favour of the fortunate young fellow
who had been supping on homage and flattery, and now came in easy and
careless to make everything straight at the last moment. Mrs. Methven on
her side was very tired, and tremulous with the exertion of packing. It
would have been impossible for her to banish that tone out of her voice.
She stood in the subdued light upon the stairs looking down upon him,
leaning on the banister to support herself; while he, with all the light
from below upon his face, ruddy with the night air, and the applauses,
and his own high well-being, looked up gaily at her. He had shaken off
all his old irritability in the confidence of happiness and good fortune
that had taken possession of him. After a moment he came springing up
the stairs three at a time.

"You look tired, mother, while I have been wasting my time. Come down,
and let us have our talk. I'll do all the rest to-morrow," he said,
throwing his arm round her and leading her down-stairs. He brought her
some wine first of all and a footstool, and threw himself into the easy
task of making her comfortable. "Now," he said, "let's talk it all
over," drawing a chair to her side.

All this was quite new upon Walter's part--or rather quite old,
belonging to an age which had long ago gone.

"Isn't it rather late for that?" she said, with a faint smile.

"Yes, and I am ashamed of myself; but, unfortunately, you are so used to
that. We must settle, however, mother. I am to go first of all to
Kinloch-houran, which Milnathort says is not a place for you. Indeed, I
hear----" here he paused a little as if he would have named his
authority, and continued, "that it is a ruinous sort of place; and why I
should go there, I don't know."

"Where did you hear?" she said, with quick suspicion.

"Well, mother, I would rather not have mentioned his name; but if you
wish to know, from Underwood. I know you are prejudiced against him.
Yes, it is prejudice, though I don't wonder at it. I care nothing for
the fellow; but still it comes out, which is rather strange, that he
knows these places, and a good deal about the Erradeens."

"Is that, then," cried the mother quickly, "the reason of his being
here?"

"He never said so, nor have I asked him," answered Walter, with
something of his old sullenness; but then he added--"The same thought
has crossed my own mind, mother, and I shouldn't wonder if it were so."

"Walter," she said, "a man like that can have but one motive--the desire
to aggrandise himself. For heaven's sake, don't have anything to do with
him; don't let him get an influence over you."

"You must have a very poor opinion of me, mother," he said, in an
aggrieved tone.

She looked at him with a curious gaze, silenced, as it seemed. She loved
him more than anything in the world, and thought of him above
everything; and yet perhaps in that wrath with those we love which works
like madness in the brain, it was true what he said--that she had a poor
opinion of him. Extremes meet, as the proverb says. However, this was a
mystery too deep for Walter to enter into.

"Don't let us waste words about Underwood," he said. "I care nothing for
the fellow; he is vulgar and presuming--as you always said."

Partly, no doubt, this avowal was made with the intention of pleasing
his mother; at the same time it proved the great moral effect of
promotion in rank. Lord Erradeen saw with the utmost distinctness what
Walter Methven had only glimpsed by intervals. And it is impossible to
describe how this speech pleased Mrs. Methven. Her tired eyes began to
shine, her heart to return to its brighter hopes.

"The thing is, what arrangements you wish me to make," said Walter.
"What are you going to do? I hear Mulmorrel is a handsome house, but
it's November, and naturally it is colder in the north. Do you think you
would care to go there now, or wait till the weather is better? It may
want furnishing, for anything I know; and it appears we've got a little
house in town."

"Walter," she said, in a voice which was husky and tremulous, "before
you enter upon all this--you must first think, my dear. Are you sure it
will be for your comfort to have me with you at all? Wouldn't you rather
be free, and make your own arrangements, and leave me--as I am?"

"MOTHER?" the young man cried. He got up suddenly from where he was
sitting beside her, and pushed away his chair, and stood facing her,
with a sudden paleness and fiery eyes that seemed to dazzle her. He had
almost kicked her footstool out of his way in his excitement and wounded
feeling. "Do you mean to say you want to have nothing to do with me?" he
said.

"Oh! my boy, you could not think so. I thought that was what--you meant.
I wish only what is for your good."

"Would it be for my good to be an unnatural cad?" said the young man,
with rising indignation--"a heartless, ill-conditioned whelp, with no
sense and no feeling? Oh, mother! mother! what a poor opinion you must
have of me!" he cried; and so stung was he with this blow that sudden
tears sprang to his eyes. "All because I'm a fool and put everything off
to the last moment," he added, in a sort of undertone, as if explaining
it to himself. "But I'm not a beast for all that," he said, fiercely.

She made him no reply, but sat and gazed at him with a remorse and
compunction, which, painful sentiments as they are, were to her sweet as
the dews from heaven. Yes, it appeared that through all her passionate
and absorbing tenderness she had had a poor opinion of him. She had done
him injustice. The conviction was like a new birth. That he should be
Lord Erradeen was nothing in comparison of being, as he thus proved
himself, good and true, open to the influences of affection and nature.
She could not speak, but her eyes were full of a thousand things; they
asked him mutely to forgive her. They repented, and were abashed and
rejoiced all in one glance. The young man who had not been nearly so
heartless as she feared, was now not nearly so noble as she thought: but
he was greatly touched by the crisis, and by the suggestion of many a
miserable hour which was in her involuntary sin against him and in her
penitence. He came back again and sat close by her, and kissed her
tremulously.

"I have been a cad," he said. "I don't wonder you lost all faith in me,
mother."

"Not that, not that," she said faintly; and then there was a moment of
exquisite silence, in which, without a word, everything was atoned for,
and pardon asked and given.

And then began perhaps the happiest hour of Mrs. Methven's life, in
which they talked over everything and decided what was to be done. Not
to give up the house in Sloebury at present, nor indeed to do anything
at present, save wait till he had made his expedition into Scotland and
seen his new property, and brought her full particulars. After he had
investigated everything and knew exactly the capabilities of the house,
and the condition in which it was, and all the necessities and
expediencies, they would then decide as to the best thing to be done;
whether to go there, though at the worst time of the year, or to go to
London, which was an idea that pleased Walter but alarmed his mother.
Mrs. Methven did her best to remember what were the duties of a great
landed proprietor and to bring them home to her son.

"You ought to spend Christmas at your own place," she said. "There will
be charities and hospitalities and the poor people to look after."

She did not know Scotland, nor did she know very well what it was to be
a great country magnate. She had been but a poor officer's daughter
herself, and had married another officer, and been beaten about from
place to place before she settled down on her small income at Sloebury.
She had not much more experience than Walter himself had in this
respect; indeed, if the truth must be told, both of them drew their
chief information from novels, those much-abused sources of information,
in which the life of rural potentates is a favourite subject, and not
always described with much knowledge. Walter gravely consented to all
this, with a conscientious desire to do what was right: but he thought
the place would most likely be gloomy for his mother in winter, and that
hospitalities would naturally be uncalled for so soon after the death of
the old lord.

"What I would advise would be Park Lane," he said, with a judicial tone.
"Milnathort said that it was quite a small house."

"What is a small house in Park Lane would look a palace at Sloebury,"
Mrs. Methven said: "and you must not begin on an extravagant footing, my
dear."

"You will let us begin comfortably, I hope," he said; "and I must look
for a nice carriage for you, mother."

Walter felt disposed to laugh as he said the words, but carried them off
with an air of easy indifference as if it were the most natural thing in
the world: while his mother on her side could have cried for pleasure
and tenderness.

"You must not mind me, Walter; we must think what is best for yourself,"
she said, as proud and pleased as if she had twenty carriages.

"Nothing of the sort," he said. "We are going to be comfortable, and you
must have everything that is right first of all."

What an hour it was! now and then there will be given to one individual
out of a class a full measure of recompense heaped and overflowing, out
of which the rest may get a sympathetic pleasure though they do not
enjoy it in their own persons. Mrs. Methven had never imagined that this
would come to her, but lo! in a moment it was pouring upon her in floods
of consolation. So absorbing was this happy consultation that it was
only when her eyes suddenly caught the clock on the mantelpiece, and saw
that the hands were marking a quarter to two! that Mrs. Methven startled
awoke out of her bliss.

"My poor boy! that I should keep you up to this hour talking, and a long
journey before you to-morrow!" she cried.

She hustled him up to his room after this, talking and resisting gaily
to the very door. He was happy too with that sense of happiness
conferred, which is always sweet, and especially to youth in the
delightful, easy sense of power and beneficence. When he thought of it
he was a little remorseful, to think that he had possessed the power so
long and never exercised it, for Walter was generous enough to be aware
that the house in Park Lane and the carriage were not the occasions of
his mother's blessedness. "Poor mother," he said to himself softly. He
might have made her a great deal more happy if he had chosen before
these fine things were dreamt of. But Mrs. Methven remembered that no
more. She begged pardon of God on her knees for misjudging her boy, and
for once in her life was profoundly, undoubtingly happy, with a
perfection and fulness of content which perhaps could only come after
long experience of the reverse. After such a moment a human creature, if
possible, should die, so as to taste nothing less sweet: for the less
sweet, to be sure, must come back if life goes on, and at that moment
there was not a cloud or a suggestion of darkness upon the firmament.
She grudged falling asleep, though she was very tired, and so losing
this beautiful hour; but nature is wilful and will seldom abdicate the
night for joy, whatever she may do for grief.

Next morning she went to the station with him to see him away.
Impossible to describe the devotion of all the officials to Lord
Erradeen's comfort on his journey. The station-master kindly came to
superintend this august departure, and the porters ran about contending
for his luggage with an excitement which made, at least, one old
gentleman threaten to write to the _Times_. There was nothing but "my
lord" and "his lordship" to be heard all over the station; and so many
persons came to bid him good-bye and see the last of him, as they said,
that the platform was quite inconveniently crowded. Among these, of
course, was Captain Underwood, whose fervent--"God bless you, my
boy"--drowned all other greetings. He had, however, a disappointed
look--as if he had failed in some object. Mrs. Methven, whose faculties
were all sharpened by her position, and who felt herself able to
exercise a toleration which, in former circumstances, would have been
impossible to her, permitted him to overtake her as she left the place,
and acknowledged his greeting with more cordiality, or, at least, with a
less forbidding civility than usual. And then a wonderful sight was seen
in Sloebury. This _béte noir_ of the feminine world, this man whom every
lady frowned upon, was seen walking along the High Street, side by side,
in earnest conversation with one of the women who had been most
unfavourable to him. Was she listening to an explanation, a
justification, an account of himself, such as he had not yet given, to
satisfy the requirements of the respectability of Sloebury? To tell the
truth, Mrs. Methven now cared very little for any such explanation. She
did not remember, as she ought to have done, that other women's sons
might be in danger from this suspicious person, though her own was now
delivered out of his power. But she was very curious to know what
anybody could tell her of Walter's new possessions, and of the family
which it was rather humiliating to know so little about. It was she,
indeed, who had begun the conversation after his first remark upon
Walter's departure and the loss which would result to Sloebury.

"You know something about the Erradeens, my son tells me," she said
almost graciously.

"Something! I know about as much as most people. I knew he was the heir,
which few, except yourselves, did," the captain said. He cast a keen
glance at her when he said, "except yourselves."

"Indeed," said Mrs. Methven, "that is scarcely correct, for Walter did
not know, and I had forgotten. I had, indeed, lost sight of my husband's
family and the succession seemed so far off."

It was thus that she veiled her ignorance and endeavoured to make it
appear that indifference on her part, and a wise desire to keep Walter's
mind unaffected by such a dazzling possibility, had been her guiding
influence. She spoke with such modest gravity that Captain Underwood,
not used to delusion under that form, was tempted into a sort of belief.
He looked at her curiously, but her veil was down, and her artifice, if
it was an artifice, was of a kind more delicate than any to which he was
accustomed.

"Well!" he said, "then it was not such a surprise to you as people
thought? Sloebury has talked of nothing else, I need not tell you, for
several days; and everybody was of opinion that it burst upon you like a
thunderbolt."

"Upon my son, yes," Mrs. Methven said with a smile.

He looked at her again, and she had the satisfaction of perceiving that
this experienced man of the world was taken in.

"Well, then," he said, "you will join with me in wishing him well out of
it: you know all the stories that are about."

"I have never been at Mulmorrel--my husband's chances in his own
lifetime were very small, you know."

"It isn't Mulmorrel, it is that little ruined place where something
uncanny is always said to go on--oh, _I_ don't know what it is; nobody
does but the reigning sovereign himself, and some hangers-on, I suppose.
I have been there. I've seen the mysterious light, you know. Nobody can
ever tell what window it shows at, or if it is any window at all. I was
once with the late man--the late lord, he who died the other day--when
it came out suddenly. We were shooting wildfowl, and his gun fell out of
his hands. I never saw a man in such a funk. We were a bit late, and
twilight had come on before we knew."

"So then you actually saw something of it yourself?" Mrs. Methven said.
She had not the remotest idea what this was, but if she could find out
something by any means she was eager enough to take advantage of it.

"No more than that; but I can tell you this: Erradeen was not seen again
for twenty-four hours. Whether it was a call to him or what it was I
can't undertake to say. He never would stand any questioning about it.
He was a good fellow enough, but he never would put up with anything on
that point. So I can only wish Walter well through it, Mrs. Methven. In
my opinion he should have had some one with him; for he is young, and, I
dare say, he is fanciful."

"My son, Lord Erradeen," said Mrs. Methven with dignity, "is man enough,
I hope, to meet an emergency. Perhaps you think him younger than he is."
She propounded this delicately as, perhaps, a sort of excuse for the
presumption of the Christian name.

Underwood grew very red: he was disappointed and irritable. "Oh, of
course you know best," he said. "As for my Lord Erradeen (I am sure I
beg your pardon for forgetting his dignity), I dare say he is quite old
enough to take care of himself--at least, we'll hope so; but a business
of that kind will upset the steadiest brain, you know. Old Erradeen had
not a bad spirit of his own, and _he_ funked it. I confess I feel a
little anxious for your boy; he's a nice fellow, but he's nervous. I was
in a dozen minds to go up with him to stand by him; but, perhaps, it is
better not, for the best motives get misconstrued in this world. I can
only wish him well out of it," Captain Underwood said, taking off his
hat, and making her a fine bow as he stalked away.

It is needless to say that this mysterious intimation of danger planted
daggers in Mrs. Methven's heart. She stopped aghast: and for the moment
the idea of running back to the station, and signalling that the train
was to be stopped came into her mind. Ridiculous folly! Wish him well
out of it? What, out of his great fortune, his peerage, his elevation in
the world? Mrs. Methven smiled indignantly, and thought of the strange
manifestations under which envy shows itself. But she went home somewhat
pale, and could not dismiss it from her mind as she wished to do. Well
out of it! And there were moments when, she remembered, she had
surprised a very serious look on the countenance of Mr. Milnathort. Was
Walter going unwarned, in the elation and happy confidence of his heart,
into some danger unknown and unforeseen? This took her confidence away
from her, and made her nervous and anxious. But after all, what folly it
must be: something uncanny and a mysterious light! These were stories
for Christmas, to bring a laugh or a shiver from idle circles round the
fire. To imagine that they could effect anything in real life was a kind
of madness; an old-fashioned, exploded superstition. It was too
ridiculous to be worthy a thought.




CHAPTER VII.


Walter arrived in Edinburgh on a wintry morning white and chill. A sort
of woolly shroud wrapped all the fine features of the landscape. He
thought the dingy turrets of the Calton Jail were the Castle, and was
much disappointed, as was natural. Arthur's Seat and the Crags were as
entirely invisible as if they had been a hundred miles away, and the
cold crept into his very bones after his night's journey, although it
had been made luxuriously, in a way very different from his former
journeyings. Also it struck him as strange and uncomfortable that nobody
was aware of the change in his position, and that even the railway
porter, to whom he gave a shilling (as a commoner he would have been
contented with sixpence), only called him "Sir," and could not perceive
that it would have been appropriate to say my lord. He went to an hotel,
as it was so early, and found only a dingy little room to repose himself
in, the more important part of the house being still in the hands of the
housemaids. And when he gave his name as Lord Erradeen, the attendants
stared at him with a sort of suspicion. They looked at his baggage
curiously, and evidently asked each other if it was possible he could be
what he claimed to be. Walter had a half-consciousness of being an
impostor, and trying to take these surprised people in. He thawed,
however, as he ate his breakfast, and the mist began to rise, revealing
the outline of the Old Town. He had never been in Edinburgh before; he
had rarely been anywhere before. It was all new to him, even the sense
of living in an inn. There was a curious freedom about it, and
independence of all restraint, which pleased him. But it was very
strange to be absolutely unknown, to meet the gaze of faces he had never
seen before, and to be obliged always to explain who he was. It was
clear that a servant was a thing quite necessary to a man who called
himself by a title, a servant not so much to attend upon him as to
answer for him, and be a sort of guarantee to the world. Now that he was
here in Edinburgh, he was not quite sure what to do with himself. It was
too early to do anything. He could not disturb old Milnathort at such an
hour. He must let the old man get to his office and read his letters
before he could descend upon him. So that on the whole Walter, though
sustained by the excitement of his new position, was altogether chilled
and not at all comfortable, feeling those early hours of grim daylight
hang very heavily on his hands. He went out after he had refreshed and
dressed--and strolled about the fine but foreign street. It looked quite
foreign to his inexperienced eyes. The Castle soared vaguely through
the grey mist; the irregular line of roofs and spires crowning the ridge
threw itself up vaguely against a darker grey behind. There was a river
of mist between him and that ridge, running deep in the hollow,
underneath the nearer bank, which was tufted with spectral bushes and
trees, and with still more spectral white statues glimmering through. On
the other side of the street, more cheerful and apparent, were the
jewellers' shops full of glistening pebbles and national ornaments.
Everybody knows that it is not these shops alone, but others of every
luxurious kind, that form the glory of Prince's Street. But Walter was a
stranger and foreigner; and in the morning mists the shining store of
cairngorms was the most cheerful sight that met his eye.

Mr. Milnathort's office was in a handsome square, with a garden in the
centre of it, and another statue holding possession of the garden. For
the first time since he left home, Walter felt a little thrill of his
new importance when he beheld the respectful curiosity produced among
the clerks by the statement of his name. They asked his lordship to step
in with an evident sensation. And for Walter himself to look into that
office where his mother had so strongly desired that he should find a
place, had the most curious effect. He felt for the moment as if he were
one of the serious young men peeping from beyond the wooden railing that
inclosed the office, at the fortunate youth whose circumstances were no
different from their own. He did not realise at that moment the
unfailing human complacency which would have come to his aid in such
circumstances, and persuaded him that the gifts of fortune had nothing
to do with real superiority. He thought of the possible reflections upon
himself of the other young fellows in their lowly estate as if he had
himself been making them. He was sorry for them all, for the contrast
they must draw, and the strange sense of human inequality that they must
feel. He was no better than they were--who could tell? perhaps not half
as good. He felt that to feel this was a due tribute from Lord Erradeen
in his good fortune to those who might have been Walter Methven's
fellow-clerks, but who had never had any chance of being Lord Erradeen.
And then he thought what a good thing it was that he had never written
that letter to Mr. Milnathort, offering himself for a desk in the
office. He had felt really guilty on the subject at the time. He had
felt that it was miserable of him to neglect the occasion thus put
before him of gaining a livelihood. Self-reproach, real and
unmistakable, had been in his mind; and yet what a good thing he had not
done it: and how little one knows what is going to happen! These were
very ordinary reflections, not showing much depth; but it must be
recollected that Walter was still in a sort of primary state of feeling,
and had not had time to reach a profounder level.

Mr. Milnathort made haste to receive him, coming out of his own room on
purpose, and giving him the warmest welcome.

"I might have thought you would come by the night train. You are not old
enough to dislike night travelling as I do; but I will take it ill, and
so will my sister, if you stay in an hotel, and your room ready for you
in our little place. I think you will be more comfortable with us,
though we have no grandeur to surround you with. My sister has a great
wish to make your acquaintance, my Lord Erradeen. She has just a
wonderful acquaintance with the family, and it was more through her than
any one that I knew just where to put my hand upon you, when the time
came."

"I did not like to disturb you so early," Walter said.

"Well, perhaps there is something in that. We are not very early birds:
and as a matter of fact, Alison did not expect you till about seven
o'clock at night. And here am I in the midst of my day's work. But I'll
tell you what I'll do for you. We'll go round to the club, and there
your young lordship will make acquaintance with somebody that can show
you something of Edinburgh. You have never been here before? It is a
great pity that there is an easterly haar, which is bad both for you and
the objects you are wanting to see. However, it is lifting, and we'll
get some luncheon, and then I will put you in the way. That is the best
thing I can do for you. Malcolm, you will send down all the documents
relative to his lordship's affairs to Moray Place, this afternoon; and
you can tell old Symington to be in attendance in case Lord Erradeen
should wish to see him. That is your cousin the late lord's body
servant. He is a man of great experience, and you might wish--; but all
that can be settled later on. If Drysdales should send over about that
case of theirs, ye will say, Malcolm, that I shall be here not later
than three in the afternoon; and if old Blairallan comes fyking, ye can
say I am giving the case my best attention; and if it's that big
north-country fellow about his manse and his augmentation----"

"I fear that I am unpardonable," said Walter, "in interfering with your
valuable time."

"Nothing of the sort. It is not every day that a Lord Erradeen comes
into his inheritance; and as there are, may be, things not over-cheerful
to tell you at night, we may as well make the best of it in the
morning," said the old lawyer. He got himself into his coat as he spoke,
slowly, not without an effort. The sun was struggling through the mist
as they went out again into the streets, and the mid-day gun from the
Castle helped for a moment to disperse the haar, and show the noble
cliff on which it rears its head aloft. Mr. Milnathort paused to look
with tender pride along the line--the houses and spires lifting out of
the clouds, the sunshine breaking through, the crown of St. Giles's
hovering like a visible sign of rank over the head of the throned city,
awakened in him that keen pleasure and elation in the beauty of his
native place which is nowhere more warmly felt than in Edinburgh. He
waved his hand towards the Old Town in triumph. "You may have seen a
great deal, but ye will never have seen anything finer than that," he
said.

"I have seen very little," said Walter; "but everybody has heard of
Edinburgh, so that it does not take one by surprise."

"Ay, that is very wisely said. If it took you by surprise, and you had
never heard of it before, the world would just go daft over it. However,
it is a drawback of a great reputation that ye never come near it with
your mind clear." Having said this the old gentleman dismissed the
subject with a wave of his hand, and said, in a different tone, "You
will be very curious about the family secrets you are coming into, Lord
Erradeen."

Walter laughed.

"I am coming to them with my mind clear," he said. "I know nothing about
them. But I don't believe much in family secrets. They belong to the
middle ages. Nowadays we have nothing to conceal."

Mr. Milnathort listened to this blasphemy with a countenance in which
displeasure struggled with that supreme sense that the rash young man
would soon know better, which disarms reproof. He shook his head.

"You may say we can conceal but little," he said, "which is true enough,
but not altogether true either. Courage is a fine thing, Lord Erradeen,
and I am always glad to see it; and if you have your imagination under
control, that will do ye still better service. In most cases it is not
only what we see, but what we think we are going to see, that daunts us.
Keep you your head cool, that is your best defence in all emergencies.
It is better to be too bold than not to be bold enough, notwithstanding
the poet's warning to yon warrior-maid of his."

These last words made Walter stare, for he was not very learned in
poetry at the best, and was totally unprepared to hear Spenser from the
lips of the old Scottish lawyer. He was silent for a little in mere
perplexity, and then he said, with a laugh--

"You speak of danger as if we were on the eve of a battle. Are there
giants to encounter or magicians? One would think we were living in the
dark ages," Walter cried with a little impatience.

Mr. Milnathort said nothing more. He led the young man into one of the
great stone palaces which form the line of Prince's Street, and which
was then the seat of the old original club of Edinburgh society. Here
Walter found himself in the midst of a collection of men with marked and
individual faces, each one of whom ought to be somebody, he thought.
Many of them were bound about the throat with white ties, like
clergymen, but they did not belong to that profession. It gave the
young man a sense of his own importance, which generally deserted him in
Mr. Milnathort's presence, and of which he felt himself to stand in
need, to perceive that he excited a great deal of interest among these
grave and potent signors. There was a certain desire visible to make his
acquaintance and to ascertain his political opinions, of which Walter
was scarcely aware as yet whether he had any. It was suggested at once
that he should be put up for the club, and invitations to dinner began
to be showered upon him. He was stopped short in his replies to those
cordial beginnings of acquaintance by Mr. Milnathort, who calmly assumed
the guidance of his movements. "Lord Erradeen," he said, "is on his way
West. Business will not permit him to tarry at this moment. We hope he
will be back ere long, and perhaps stay a while in Edinburgh, and see
what is to be seen in the way of society." This summary way of taking
all control of his own movements from him astounded Walter so much that
he merely stared at his old tyrant or vizier, and in his confusion of
surprise and anger did not feel capable of saying anything, which, after
all, was the most dignified way; for, he said to himself, it was not
necessary to yield implicit obedience even if he refrained from open
protest upon these encroachments on his liberty. In the mean time it was
evident that the old lawyer did not intend him to have any liberty at
all. He produced out of the recesses of the club library a beaming
little man in spectacles, to whom he committed the charge of the young
stranger.

"Mr. Bannatyne," he said, "knows Edinburgh as well as I know my
chambers, and he will just take you round what is most worth seeing."

When Walter attempted to escape with a civil regret to give his new
acquaintance trouble he was put down by both with eagerness.

"The Old Town is just the breath of my nostrils," said the little
antiquary.

"It cannot be said that it's a fragrant breath," said old Milnathort;
"but since that is so, Lord Erradeen, you would not deprive our friend
of such a pleasure: and we'll look for you by five or six at Moray
Place, or earlier if you weary, for it's soon dark at this time of the
year."

To find himself thus arrested in the first day of his emancipation and
put into the hands of a conductor was so annoying yet so comic that
Walter's resentment evaporated in the ludicrous nature of the situation
and his consciousness that otherwise he would not know what to do with
himself. But sight-seeing requires a warmer inspiration than this, and
even the amusement of beholding his companion's enthusiasm over all the
dark entries and worn-out inscriptions was not enough to keep Walter's
interest alive. His own life at this moment was so much more interesting
than anything else, so much more important than those relics of a past
which had gone away altogether out of mortal ken. When the blood is at
high pressure in our veins, and the future lying all before us, it is
very difficult to turn back, and force our eager eyes into contemplation
of scenes with which we ourselves have little or no connection. The
antiquary, however, was not to be baulked. He looked at his young
companion with his head on one side like a critical bird. "You are
paying no attention to me," he said half pathetically; "but 'cod, man (I
beg your pardon, my lord!), ye _shall_ be interested before I'm done."
With this threat he hurried Walter along to the noisiest and most
squalid part of that noble but miserable street which is the pride of
Edinburgh, and stopped short before a small but deep doorway, entering
from a short flight of outside stairs. The door was black with age and
neglect, and showed a sort of black cave within, out of which all kind
of dingy figures were fluttering. The aspect of the muddy stairs and
ragged wayfarers was miserable enough, but the mouldings of the lintel,
and the spiral staircase half visible at one side, were of a grim
antiquity, and so was the lofty tenement above, with its many rows of
windows and high-stepped gable.

"Now just look here," said Mr. Bannatyne, "these arms will tell their
own story."

There was a projecting boss of rude, half-obliterated carving on the
door.

"I cannot make head nor tail of it," said the young man; his patience
was beginning to give way.

"Lord Erradeen," cried the other with enthusiasm, "this is worth your
fattest farm; it is of more interest than half your inheritance; it is
as historical as Holyrood. You are just awfully insensible, you young
men, and think as little of the relics that gave you your consequences
in the world--!" He paused a little in the fervour of his indignation,
then added--"But there are allowances to be made for you as you were
bred in England, and perhaps are little acquainted--My lord, this is
Me'even's Close, bearing the name even now in its decay. It was my Lord
Methven's lodging in the old time. Bless me! can your young eyes not
read the motto that many people have found so significant? Look here,"
cried Walter's cicerone, tracing with his stick the half-effaced
letters, "Baithe Sune and Syne."

Young Lord Erradeen began, as was natural, to feel ashamed of himself.
He felt a pang of discomfort too, for this certainly bore no resemblance
to the trim piece of modern Latin about the conquering power of virtue
which was on his father's seal. The old possibility that he might turn
out an impostor after all gleamed across his mind. "Does this belong to
me?" he added with some eagerness, to veil these other and less easy
sentiments.

"I know nothing about that," said Mr. Bannatyne with a slight tone of
contempt. "But it was the Lord of Methven's lodging in the days when
Scots lords lived in the Canongate of Edinburgh." Then he added, "There
is a fine mantelpiece up-stairs which you had better see. Oh nobody will
have any objection, a silver key opens every door hereabout. If it
should happen to be yours, my lord, and I were you," said the eager
little man, "I would clear out the whole clanjamfry and have it
thoroughly cleaned, and make a museum of the place. You would pick up
many a curious bit as the auld houses go down. This way, to the right,
and mind the hole in the wall. The doors are all carved, if you can see
them for the dirt, and you'll not often see a handsomer room."

It was confusing at first to emerge out of the gloom of the stairs into
the light of the great room, with its row of windows guiltless of either
blind or curtain, which was in possession of a group of ragged children,
squatting about in front of the deep, old-fashioned chimney, over which
a series of elaborate carvings rose to the roof. The room had once been
panelled, but half of the woodwork had been dragged down, and the rest
was in a deplorable state. The contrast of the squalor and wretchedness
about him, with the framework of the ancient, half-ruined grandeur, at
once excited and distressed Walter. There was a bed, or rather a heap of
something covered with the bright patches of an old quilt, in one
corner, in another an old corner cupboard fixed into the wall, a rickety
table and two chairs in the middle of the room. The solemn, unsheltered
windows, like so many hollow, staring eyes, gazed out through the cold
veil of the mist upon the many windows of an equally tall house on the
other side of the street, the view being broken by a projecting pole
thrust forth from the middle one, upon which some dingy clothes were
hanging to dry. The children hung together, getting behind the biggest
of them, a ragged, handsome girl, with wild, elf locks, who confronted
the visitors with an air of defiance. The flooring was broken in many
places, and dirty beyond description. Walter felt it intolerable to be
here, to breathe the stifling atmosphere, to contemplate this hideous
form of decay. He thought some one was looking at him from behind the
torn panels. "This is horrible," he said. "I hope I have nothing to do
with it." Disgust and a shivering, visionary dread was in his voice.

"Your race has had plenty to do with it," said the antiquary. "It was
here, they say, that the warlock-lord played most of his pliskies. It
was his 'warm study of deals' like that they made for John Knox on the
other side of the street. These walls have seen strange sights: and if
you believe in witchcraft, as one of your name ought----"

"Why should one of my name believe in witchcraft? It appears," he said,
with petulance, "that I know very little about my name."

"So I should have said," said the antiquary, dryly. "But no doubt you
have heard of your great ancestor, the warlock-lord? I am not saying
that I admire the character in the abstract; but an ancestor like that
is fine for a family. He was mixed up in all the doings of the time, and
he made his own out of every one of them. And then he's a grand
historical problem to the present day, which is no small distinction.
You never heard of that? Oh, my lord, that's just not possible! He was
the one whose death was never proved nor nothing about him, where he was
buried, or the nature of his end, or if he ever came to an end at all;
his son would never take the title, and forbade _his_ son to do it: but
by the time you have got to the second generation you are not minding so
much. I noticed that the late lord would never enter into conversation
on the subject. The family has always been touchy about it. It was the
most complete disappearance I can recollect hearing of. Most historical
puzzles clear themselves up in time: but this never was cleared up. Of
course it has given rise to legends. You will perhaps be more interested
in the family legends, Lord Erradeen?"

"Not at all," said Walter, abruptly. "I have told you I know very little
about the family. What is it we came to see?--not this wretched place
which makes me sick. The past should carry off its shell with it, and
not leave these old clothes to rot here."

"Oh!" cried little Mr. Bannatyne, with a shudder. "I never suspected I
was bringing in an iconoclast. That mantelpiece is a grand work of art,
Lord Erradeen. Look at that serpent twisted about among the
drapery--you'll not see such work now; and the ermine on that mantle
just stands out in every hair, for all the grime and the smoke. It is
the legend beneath the shield that is most interesting in the point of
view of the family. It's a sort of rhyming slogan, or rather it's an
addition to the old slogan, 'Live, Me'even,' which everybody knows."

Walter felt a mingled attraction and repulsion which held him there
undecided in front of the great old fireplace, like Hercules or any
other hero between the symbolical good and evil. He had a great
curiosity to know what all this meant mingled with an angry
disinclination impossible to put into words. Mr. Bannatyne, who of
course knew nothing of what was going on in his mind, took upon himself
the congenial task of tracing the inscription out. It was doggerel, bad
enough to satisfy every aspiration of an antiquary. It was as follows:--

    "Né fleyt atte Helle, né fond for Heeven,
                        Live, Me'even."

"You will see how it fits in with the other motto," cried the
enthusiast. "'Baithe Sune and Syne,' which has a grand kind of
indifference to time and all its changes that just delights me. And the
other has the same sentiment, 'Neither frightened for hell nor keen
about heaven.' It is the height of impiety," he said, with a subdued
chuckle; "but that's not inappropriate--it's far from inappropriate; it
is just, in fact, what might have been expected. The warlock lord----"

"I hope you won't think me ungrateful," cried Walter, "but I don't think
I want to know any more about that old ruffian. There is something in
the place that oppresses me." He took out from his pocket a handful of
coins. (It was with the pleasure of novelty that he shook them together,
gold and silver in one shining heap, and threw half a dozen of them to
the little group before the fire.) "For heaven's sake let us get out of
this!" he said, nervously. He could not have explained the sentiment of
horror, almost of fear, that was in his mind. "If it is mine," he said,
as they went down the spiral stair, groping against the black humid
wall, "I shall pull it down and let in some air and clear the filth
away."

"God bless me!" cried the antiquary in horror and distress, "you will
never do that. The finest street in Christendom, and one of the best
houses! No, no, Lord Erradeen, you will never do that!"

When Mr. Bannatyne got back to the club, he expressed an opinion of Lord
Erradeen, which we are glad to believe further experience induced him to
modify. He declared that old Bob Milnathort had given him such a handful
as he had not undertaken for years. "Just a young Cockney!" he said, "a
stupid Englishman! with no more understanding of history, or even of the
share his own race has had in it, than that collie dog--indeed, Yarrow
is far more intelligent, and a brute that is conscious of a fine
descent. I am not saying that there are not fine lads among some of
those English-bred young men, and some that have the sense to like
old-fashioned things. But this young fellow is just a Cockney, he is
just a young cynic. Pull down the house, said he? Spoil the first street
in Europe! We'll see what the Town Council--not to say the Woods and
Forests--will say to that, my young man! And I hope I have Bailie Brown
under my thumb!" the enraged antiquary cried.

Meantime Walter made his way through the dark streets in a tremor of
excitement and dislike of which he could give no explanation to himself.
Why should the old house have affected him so strongly! There was no
reason for it that he knew. Perhaps there was something in the
suddenness of the transition from the comfortable English prose of
Sloebury to all these old world scenes and suggestions which had a
disenchanting effect upon him. He had not been aware that he was more
matter of fact than another, less likely to be affected by romance and
historical associations. But so it had turned out. The grimy squalor of
the place, the bad atmosphere, the odious associations, had either
destroyed for him all the more attractive prejudices of long family
descent, and a name which had descended through many generations--or
else, something more subtle still, some internal influence, had
communicated that loathing and sickness of the heart. Which was it? He
could not tell. He said to himself, with a sort of scorn at himself,
that probably the bourgeois atmosphere of Sloebury had made him
incapable of those imaginative flights for which the highest and the
lowest classes have a mutual aptitude. The atmosphere of comfort and
respectability was against it. This idea rather exasperated him, and he
dwelt upon it with a natural perversity because he hated to identify
himself as one of that stolid middle class which is above or beneath
fanciful impulses. Then he began to wonder whether all this might not be
part of a deep-laid scheme on the part of old Milnathort to get him,
Walter, under his power. No doubt it was arranged that he should be
brought to that intolerable place, and all the spells of the past called
forth to subdue him by his imagination if never through his intellect.
What did they take him for? He was no credulous Celt, but a sober-minded
Englishman, not likely to let his imagination run away with him, or to
be led by the nose by any _diablerie_, however skilful. They might make
up their minds to it, that their wiles of this kind would meet with no
success. Walter was by no means sure who he meant by _they_, or why they
should endeavour to get him into their power; but he wanted something to
find fault with--some way of shaking off the burden of a mental weight
which he did not understand, which filled him with discomfort and new
sensations which he could not explain. He could almost have supposed
(had he believed in mesmerism, according to the description given of it
in fiction--) that he was under some mesmeric influence, and that some
expert, some adept, was trying to decoy him within some fatal circle of
impression. But he set his teeth and all his power of resistance against
it. They should not find him an easy prey.




CHAPTER VIII.


The drawing-room in Moray Place seemed in the partial gloom very large
and lofty. It must be remembered that Walter was accustomed only to the
comparatively small rooms of an English country town where there was
nobody who was very rich--and the solid, tall Edinburgh houses were
imposing to him. There was no light but that which came from a blazing
fire, and which threw an irregular ruddy illumination upon everything,
but no distinct vision. He saw the tall windows indefinitely draped, and
looking not unlike three colossal women in abundant vague robes standing
against the wall. In a smaller room behind, which opened from this, the
firelight was still brighter, but still only partially lit up the
darkness. It showed, however, a table placed near the fire, and glowing
with bright reflections from its silver and china; and just beyond that,
out of the depths of what looked like an elongated easy-chair, a piece
of whiteness, which was a female countenance. Walter, confused at his
entrance, made out after a moment that it was a lady, half reclining on
a sort of invalid _chaise longue_, who raised herself slightly to
receive him, with a flicker of a pair of white, attenuated hands. "You
are very welcome, Lord Erradeen," she said, in a sweet, feeble voice.
"Will you excuse my rising--for I'm a great invalid--and come and sit
down here beside me? I have been looking for you this half-hour past."
The hand which she held out to him was so thin that he scarcely felt its
light pressure. "If you have no objection," said Miss Milnathort, "we
will do with the firelight for a little longer. It is my favourite
light. My brother sent me word I was to expect you, and after your cold
walk you will be glad of a cup of tea." She did not pause for any reply,
but went on, drawing the table towards her, and arranging everything
with the skill of an accustomed hand. "I am just a cripple creature,"
she said. "I have had to learn to serve myself in this way, and Robert
is extraordinarily thoughtful. There is not a mechanical convenience
invented but I have it before it is well out of the brain that devised
it; and that is how I get on so well with no backbone to speak of. All
this is quite new to you," she said, quickly shaking off one subject and
taking up another, with a little swift movement of her head.

"Do you mean--Edinburgh, or----"

"I mean everything," said the lady. "Edinburgh will be just a bit of
scenery in the drama that is opening upon you, and here am I just
another tableau. I can see it all myself with your young eyes. You can
scarcely tell if it is real."

"That is true enough," said Walter, "and the scenery all turns upon the
plot so far: which is what it does not always do upon the stage."

"Ay!" said Miss Milnathort, with a tone of surprise, "and how may that
be? I don't see any particular significance in Holyrood. It is where all
you English strangers go, as if Edinburgh had no meaning but Queen
Mary."

"We did not go to Holyrood. We went to Lord Methven's Lodging, as I hear
it is called: which was highly appropriate."

"Dear me," said the lady, "do you mean to tell me that John Bannatyne
had that sense in him? I will remember that the next time Robert calls
him an auld foozle. And so you saw the lodging of Methven? I have never
seen it myself. Did it not make your heart sick to see all the poverty
and misery in that awful street? Oh yes, I'm told it's a grand street:
but I never have the heart to go into it. I think the place should die
with the age that gave it birth."

This was a sentiment so entirely unlike what Walter had expected to
hear, that for the moment it took from him all power of reply. "That
would be hard upon antiquity," he said at length, "and I don't know what
the artists would say, or our friend Mr. Bannatyne."

"He would have me burnt for a witch," the invalid said with a sweet
little laugh; and then she added, "Ah, it is very well to talk about
art; but there was great sense in that saying of the old Reformers,
'Ding down the nest, and the crows will flee away.'"

"I expected," said Walter, "to find you full of reverence for the past,
and faith in mysteries and family secrets, and--how can I tell?--ghosts
perhaps." He laughed, but the invalid did not echo his laugh. And this
brought a little chill and check to his satisfaction. The sense that one
has suddenly struck a jarring note is highly uncomfortable when one is
young. Walter put back his chair a little, not reflecting that the
firelight revealed very little of his sudden blush.

"I have had no experience in what you call ghosts," she said, gravely.
"I cannot, to tell the truth, see any argument against them, except just
that we don't see them; and I think that's a pity, for my part."

To this, as it was a view of the subject equally new to him, Walter made
no reply.

"Take you care, Lord Erradeen," she resumed hastily, "not to let
yourself be persuaded to adopt that sort of nomenclature." There was a
touch of Scotch in her accent that naturalised the long word, and made
it quite in keeping. "Conclude nothing to be a ghost till you cannot
account for it in any other way. There are many things that are far more
surprising," she said; then, shaking off the subject once more with that
little movement of her head, "You are not taking your tea. You must have
had a tiring day after travelling all night. That is one of the modern
fashions I cannot make up my mind to. They tell me the railway is not
so wearying as the long coach journeys we used to make in the old time."

"But you--can scarcely remember the old coach journeys? Why, my
mother----"

"Very likely I am older than your mother; and I rarely budge out of this
corner. I have never seen your mother, but I remember Captain Methven
long long ago, who was not unlike the general outline of you, so far as
I can make out. When the light comes you will see I am an old woman. It
is just possible that this is why I am so fond of the firelight," she
said with a laugh; "for I'm really very young though I was born long
ago. Robert and me, we remember all our games and plays in a way that
people that have had children of their own never do. We are just boy and
girl still, and I've known us, after a long talk, forget ourselves
altogether, and talk of papa and mamma!" She clapped her hands together
at this, and went into a peal of genuine laughter, such as is always
infectious. Walter laughed too, but in a half-embarrassed, half-unreal
way. All was so strange to him, and this curious introduction into a
half-seen, uncomprehended world the most curious of all.

"I would like to know a little about yourself," she resumed after a
moment. "You were not in the secret that it was you who were the kin? It
was strange your father should have left you in the dark."

"I can't remember my father," said Walter, hastily.

"That makes little difference; but you were always a strange family.
Now you, Robert tells me, you're not so very much of an Erradeen--you
take after your mother's side. And I'm very very glad to hear it. It
will perhaps be you, if you have the courage, that will put a stop
to--many things. There are old rhymes upon that subject, but you will
put little faith in old rhymes; I none at all. I believe they are just
made up long after the occasion, just for the sake of the fun, or
perhaps because some one is pleased with himself to have found a rhyme.
Now that one that they tell me is in the Canongate--that about 'Live,
Me'even--'"

"I thought you said you didn't know it?"

"I have never seen it; but you don't suppose I am ignorant of the
subject, Lord Erradeen? Do you know I have been here stretched out in my
chair these thirty years? and what else could I give my attention to,
considering all things? Well, I do not believe in that. Oh, it's far too
pat! When a thing is true it is not just so terribly in keeping. I
believe it was made up by somebody that knew the story just as we do;
probably a hundred years or more after the event."

Walter did not say that he was quite unacquainted with the event. His
interest perhaps, though he was not aware of it, was a little less warm
since he knew that Miss Milnathort was his mother's contemporary rather
than his own; but he had come to the conclusion that it was better not
to ask any direct questions. The light had faded much, and was now
nothing more than a steady red glow in place of the leaping and blazing
of the flames. He scarcely saw his entertainer at all. There were two
spots of brightness which moved occasionally, and which represented her
face and the hands which she had clasped together (when they were not
flickering about in incessant gesture) in her lap. But there was
something altogether quaint and strange in the situation. It did not
irritate him as the men had done. And then she had the good sense to
agree with him in some respects, though the _mélange_ of opinions in her
was remarkable, and he did not understand what she would be at. There
was an interval of quiet in which neither of them said anything, and
then a large step was audible coming slowly up-stairs, and through the
other drawing room.

"Here is Robert," the invalid said with a smile in her voice. It was
nothing but a tall shadow that appeared, looming huge in the ruddy
light.

"Have you got Lord Erradeen with you, Alison? and how are you and he
getting on together?" said old Milnathort's voice.

Walter rose hastily to his feet with a feeling that other elements less
agreeable were at once introduced, and that his pride was affronted by
being discussed in this easy manner over his head.

"We are getting on fine, Robert. He is just as agreeable as you say, and
I have great hopes will be the man. But you are late, and it will soon
be time for dinner. I would advise you to show our young gentleman to
his room, and see that he's comfortable. And after dinner, when you
have had your good meal, we'll have it all out with him."

"I am thinking, Alison, that there is a good deal we must go over that
will be best between him and me."

"That must be as you please, Robert, my man," said the lady, and Walter
felt like a small child who is being discussed over his head by grown-up
persons, whom he feels to be his natural enemies. He rose willingly, yet
with unconscious offence, and followed his host to his room, inwardly
indignant with himself for having thus impaired his own liberty by
forsaking his inn. The room however was luxuriously comfortable, shining
with firelight, and a grave and respectable servant in mourning, was
arranging his evening clothes upon the bed.

"This is Symington," said Mr. Milnathort, "he was your late
cousin's body-servant. The late Lord Erradeen gave him a very warm
recommendation. There might be things perhaps in which he would be of
use."

"Thanks," said Walter, impulsively. "I have a man coming. I am afraid
the recommendation is a little too late."

This unfortunately was not true; but the young man felt that to allow
himself to be saddled with a sort of governor in the shape of the late
lord's servant was more than could be required of him; and that he must
assert himself before it was too late.

"You will settle that at your pleasure, my lord," said old Milnathort,
and he went away shutting the door carefully, his steady, slow step
echoing along the passage. The man was not apparently in the least
daunted by Walter's irritation. He went on mechanically, lightly
brushing out a crease, and unfolding the coat with that affectionate
care which a good servant bestows upon good clothes. Walter longed to
have brought his old coat with him that everything should not have been
so distressingly new.

"That will do," he said, "that will do. It is a pity to give you so much
trouble when, as I tell you, I have another man engaged."

"It is no trouble, my lord; it is a pleasure. I came out of attachment
to the family. I've been many years about my late lord. And however ye
may remind yourself that you are but a servant, and service is no
heritage, yet it's not easy to keep yourself from becoming attached."

"My good man," said Walter, half impatient, half touched, "you never saw
me in your life before. I can't see how you can have any attachment to
me."

Symington had a long face, with a somewhat lugubrious expression,
contradicted by the twinkle of a pair of humorous, deep-set eyes. He
gave a glance up at Walter from where he stood fondling the lappels of
the new coat.

"There are many kinds of attachments, my lord," he said oracularly;
"some to the person and some to the race. For a number of years past I
have, so to speak, just identified myself with the Erradeens. It's not
common in England, so far as I can hear, but it's just our old Scots
way. I will take no other service. So, being free, if your lordship
pleases, I will just look after your lordship's things till the other
man comes."

Walter perceived in a moment by the way Symington said these words that
he had no faith whatever in the other man. He submitted accordingly to
the ministrations of the family retainer, with a great deal of his old
impatience, tempered by a sense of the humour of the situation. It
seemed that he was never to have any control over himself. He had barely
escaped from the tutelage of home when he fell into this other which was
much more rigid. "Poor mother!" he said to himself, with an affectionate
recollection of her many cares, her anxious watchfulness; and laughed to
himself at the thought that she was being avenged.

Mr. Milnathort's table was handsome and liberal; the meal even too
abundant for the solitary pair who sat alone at a corner of the large
table, amid a blaze of light. Miss Milnathort did not appear.

"She never comes down. She has never sat down at table since she had her
accident, and that is thirty years since."

There was something in Mr. Milnathort's tone as he said this that made
Walter believe that her accident too had something to do with the
family. Everything tended towards that, or sprang from it. Had he been
to the manner born, this would no doubt have seemed to him natural
enough; but as it was he could not keep himself from the idea either
that he was being laughed at, or that some design was hidden beneath
this constant reference. The dinner, however, went off quietly. It was
impossible to discuss anything of a private character in the presence of
Milnathort's serious butler, and of the doubly grave apparition of
Symington, who helped the other to wait.

Walter had never dined so solemnly before. It must be added, however,
that he had seldom dined so well. It was a pity that he was so little
knowing in this particular. Mr. Milnathort encouraged him through the
repast by judicious words of advice and recommendation. He was very
genial and expansive at this most generous moment of the day. Fond of
good fare himself he liked to communicate and recommend it, and Walter's
appetite was excellent, if perhaps his taste was uncultivated. The two
noiseless attendants circulating about the table served them with a
gravity in perfect keeping with the importance of the event, which was
to the old lawyer the most interesting of the day.

When they were left alone finally, the aspect of affairs changed a
little. Mr. Milnathort cleared his throat, and laid aside his napkin. He
said--

"We must not forget, Lord Erradeen, that we have a great deal of
business to get through. But you have had a fatiguing day, and probably
very little sleep last night"--

"I slept very well, I assure you," Walter replied cheerfully.

"Ay, ay, you are young," said Mr. Milnathort, with a half-sigh. "Still
all the financial statements, and to give you a just view of all that's
coming to you, will take time. With your permission we'll keep that till
to-morrow. But there's just a thing or two--. Lord save us!" he cried
suddenly, "you're not the kind of person for this. There is many a one I
know that would have liked it all the better--till they knew--for what's
attached to it. I thought as much when I first set eyes upon you. This
will be one that will not take it all for gospel, I said to myself--one
that will set up his own judgment, and demand the reason why."

Walter, a little uncertain at first how to take this, ended by being
gratified with such an estimate of himself. It showed, he felt, more
perception than he had looked for, and he answered, with a little
complacency, "I hope you think that is the right way of approaching a
new subject."

"I am not unbiased myself," said the lawyer, "and I have had to do with
it all my life. There are conditions connected with your inheritance,
Lord Erradeen, that may seem out of the way to a stranger. If you had
succeeded in the way of nature, as your father's son, they would not
have been new to you, and you would have been prepared. In that way it
is hard upon you. There was one of your ancestors that laid certain
conditions, as I was saying, upon every heir. He was one that had, as
you may say, a good right to do that, or whatever else he pleased,
seeing he was the making of the family. In old days it was no more than
a bit small highland lairdship. It was he that gave it consequence; but
he has held a heavy hand upon his successors ever since."

"Would it be he by any chance of whom Mr. Bannatyne was discoursing to
me," said Walter, "under the title of the warlock-lord?"

"Ah! John Bannatyne took that upon him?" cried Mr. Milnathort with
vivacity. His eyes gleamed from under his deep-set brows. "The less a
man knows the more ready he is to instruct the world: but I never
thought he would take that upon him. So you see, as I was saying, there
are certain formalities to go through. It is understood that once a
year, wherever he may be, Lord Erradeen should pass, say a week, say two
or three days, in the old castle of Kinloch Houran, which is the old
seat of the family, the original of the Methven race."

Walter had been listening with some anxiety. He drew a long breath as
Mr. Milnathort came to a pause. "Is that all?" he cried, with a voice of
relief. Then he laughed. "I was winding myself up to something heroic,
but if it is only a periodical retirement to an old castle--to think, I
suppose, upon one's sins and examine one's conscience----"

"Something very like that," said the old man, somewhat grimly.

"Well! It might be a great inconvenience; but there is nothing very
appalling in the prospect, if that is all."

"It is all, Lord Erradeen--if ye except what passes there, a thing that
is your own concern, and that I have never pried into for my part. And
just this beside, that you are expected there at once and without
delay."

"Expected--at once and without delay." Walter grew red with anger at
these peremptory words. "This sounds a little arbitrary," he said.
"Expected? by whom? and to what purpose? I don't understand----"

"Nor do I, my young lord. But it's so in the documents, and so has it
been with every Lord of Erradeen up to this period. It is the first
thing to be done. Before you come into enjoyment of anything, or take
your place in the country, there is this visit--if you like to call it a
visit: this--sojourn: not a long one, at least, you may be thankful--to
be made----"

"To what purpose?" Walter repeated, almost mechanically. He could not,
himself, understand the sudden tempest of resistance, of anger, of alarm
that got up within him. "There is reason in everything," he said,
growing pale. "What is it for? What am I to do?"

"Lord Erradeen, a minute since you said, was that all? And now you
change colour: you ask why, and wherefore--"

Walter made a great effort to regain command of himself. "It is
inconsistent, I allow," he said. "Somehow, the order to go now is
irritating and unpleasant. I suppose it's simple enough, a piece of
tyranny such as people seem to think they may indulge in after they're
dead. But it is abominably arbitrary and tyrannical. What good does the
old beggar think----"

"Hold your peace," cried Mr. Milnathort, with a little trepidation. "We
have no right to call names, and I would not like it to be thought----"
Here he paused with a sort of uneasy smile, and added, "I am speaking
nonsense," with a vague glance about him. "I think we might join my
sister up-stairs; and, as she knows just as much as I do, or, maybe,
more, you can speak as freely as you please before her--oh, quite
freely. But, my dear young lord, call no names!" cried Mr. Milnathort.
He got up hurriedly, leaving his wine which he had just filled out, a
demonstration of sincerity which made a great impression upon Walter:
and threw open the door. "Putting off the business details till
to-morrow, I know nothing else that we cannot discuss before Alison," he
said.

Walter was much startled when he went back to the inner drawing-room and
found it lighted. Miss Milnathort did not employ any of those devices by
which light is softened to suit the exigencies of beauty which has
passed its prime. The light (alas for the prejudices of the æsthetic
reader) was gas; and, though it was slightly disguised by means of opal
glass, it still poured down in a brilliant flood, and the little room
was almost as light as day. She lay in her _chaise longue_ placed under
this illumination. Her face was preternaturally young, almost childish,
small, and full of colour, her hair snow-white. She seemed to have been
exempted from the weight of years, in compensation, perhaps, for other
sufferings; her skin was smooth and unwrinkled, her eyes full of dewy
brightness like those of a girl. Her dress, so far as it was visible,
was white, made of cashmere or some other woollen material, solid and
warm, but with lace at the neck, and pretty ribbons breaking the
monotony of the tint. She looked like a girl dressed for some simple
party, who had lain there waiting for the little festivity to begin, for
no one could imagine how many years. Her hands were soft and round and
young like her face. The wind had not been allowed to visit her cheek
too roughly for a lifetime. What had happened before the event which she
and her brother had both referred to as her "accident" belonged to a
period which had evidently nothing to do with the present. Walter saw at
a glance that every possible convenience which could be invented for an
invalid surrounded her. She had a set of bookshelves at one side with
vacant spaces where she could place the book she was reading. Tables
that wheeled towards her at a touch, with needlework, with knitting,
with drawing materials, were arranged within reach. One of these made
into a desk and put itself across her couch by another adaptation. It
was evident that the tenderest affection and care had made this prison
of hers into a sort of museum of every ingenuity that had ever been
called to the help of the suffering. She lay, or rather sat, for that
was her general position, with an air of pleasant expectation on her
face, and received them with smiles and hands held out. "Come away,
come away," she said in her soft Scotch. "I have been wearying for you."
Walter thought there was something of age in her voice, but that might
have been only the Scotch, and the unusual form of her salutation. She
pointed out a chair to him carefully placed for her convenience in
seeing and hearing. "Come and tell me what you think about it all," she
said.

"I have not heard much," said Walter, "to think about: except that I am
to go away directly, which does not please me at all, Miss Milnathort."

"Oh, you will come back, you will come back," she said.

"I hope so: but the reason why I should go doesn't seem very plain. What
would happen, I wonder, if I didn't?" Walter said, lightly. He was
surprised to see how much effect was produced upon his companions by
this very simple utterance. Miss Milnathort put her hands together, as
if to clasp them in triumph. Her brother stood looking down upon the
others, with his back to the light, and an air of alarmed displeasure.

"One result would be that certain of the lands would pass to the next
heir," he said; "besides, perhaps--other penalties: that I would not
incur, Lord Erradeen, if I were you."

"What penalties? But do you think at this time of day," said Walter,
"that ridiculous conditions of this kind that can mean nothing could
really be upheld by the law--now that bequests of all kinds are being
interfered with, and even charities?"

"Robert, that is true. There was the Melville mortification that you had
so much trouble about, and that was a charity. How much more, as young
Lord Erradeen is saying, when it is just entirely out of reason."

"You should hold your peace on legal subjects, Alison. What can you know
about them? I disapprove of all interference with the will of a
testator, Lord Erradeen. I hold it to be against the law, and against
that honour and honesty that we owe to the dead as well as the living.
But there has always been a license allowed in respect to charities. So
far as they are intended to be for the good of the poor, we have a right
to see that the testator's meaning is carried out, even if it be
contrary to his stipulations. But in a private case there is no such
latitude. And you must always respect the testator's meaning, which is
very clear in this case, as even you will allow, Alison."

"Ay, clear enough," cried the young-old lady, shaking her white head.
"But I'm on your side, Lord Erradeen. I would just let them try their
worst, and see what would come of it, if, instead of a lame woman, I was
a young man, lively and strong like you."

"The question is," said Walter, "for I have become prudent since I have
had property--whether for such an insignificant affair it is worth while
losing a substantial advantage, as Mr. Milnathort says? And then,
perhaps, a new man like myself, coming into an antiquated routine, there
would be a sort of discourtesy, a want of politeness--" He laughed. "One
ought, I suppose, to be on one's best behaviour in such circumstances,"
he said.

Miss Milnathort's countenance fell a little. She did not make any reply;
but she had been listening with an air so eager and full of vivacity,
anxious to speak, that the young man at once perceived the
disappointment in her expressive little face. He said quickly--

"That does not please you? What would you have me to do?" with an
involuntary sense that she had a right to an opinion.

Mr. Milnathort at this moment sat heavily down on the other side, giving
great emphasis to his interruption by the sound of his chair drawn
forward, a sound which she protested against with a sudden contraction
of her forehead, putting up a delicate hand.

"I beg your pardon, my dear, for making a noise. You must not consult
Alison, Lord Erradeen; she is prejudiced on one side--and I--perhaps I
am, if not prejudiced, yet biased, on the other. You must act on your
own instinct, which, as far as I can judge, is a just one. It would be a
great incivility, as you say, for a far-away collateral, that is really
no more than a stranger, to set himself against the traditions of a
house."

Walter did not much like to hear himself described as a far-away
collateral. It sounded like a term of reproach, and as he did not
choose to say anything more on this matter, he made the best change of
subject he could.

"I wonder," he said, "what would happen with any of the fantastic old
feudal tenures if a new heir, a new man like myself, should simply
refuse to fulfil them."

"Mostly they take a pride and a pleasure in fulfilling them," said the
old lawyer.

"But suppose," cried Walter, "for the sake of argument, that a new Duke
of Marlborough should say, 'What rubbish! Why should I send that
obsolete old flag to Windsor?' That is a modern instance; or
suppose----"

"Just that," cried Miss Milnathort, striking in with a flicker of her
pretty hands. "Suppose young Glenearn should refuse when he comes of age
to hear a word about that secret cha'mer----"

"What would happen?" said Walter, with a laugh of profane and irreverent
youth.

Mr. Milnathort rose to his full height; he pushed back his chair with an
indignant movement.

"You may as well ask me," he said, "what would happen if the pillars of
the earth should give way. It is a thing that cannot be, at least till
the end of all things is at hand. I will ring for prayers, Alison. My
Lord Erradeen is young; he knows little; but this kind of profane talk
is not to be justified from you and me."

Then the bell was rung; the servants came trooping up-stairs, and
Symington gave Walter a sidelong look as he took his seat behind their
backs. It seemed to assert a demure claim of proprietorship, along with
a total want of faith in the "other man." Young Lord Erradeen found that
it was all he could do to restrain an irreverent laugh. The position was
so comic, that his original sense of angry resistance disappeared before
it. He was going off against his will to pass through a mysterious
ordeal in an old ruined house, under charge of a servant whom he did not
want, and in obedience to a stipulation which he disowned. He was not
half so free an agent as he had been when he was poor Walter Methven,
knocking about the streets of Sloebury and doing much what he liked,
though he thought himself in bondage. Bondage! he did not know in the
old days what the word would mean.




CHAPTER IX.


The day on which Walter set out for Kinloch Houran was fine and bright,
the sky very clear, the sun shining, the hills standing out against the
blue, and every line of the tall trees clearly marked upon the
transparent atmosphere. It was not till two days after the conversation
above recorded--for there had been much to explain, and Walter was so
little acquainted with business that instructions of various kinds were
necessary. Miss Milnathort was visible much earlier than usual on the
morning of his departure, and he was admitted to see her. She was paler
than before, and her little soft face was full of agitation; the corners
of her mouth turned down, and her upper lip, which was a trifle too
long, quivering. This added rather than took away from her appearance of
youth. She was like a child who had exhausted itself with crying, and
still trembled with an occasional sob. She stretched up her arms to him
as if she would have put them round his neck, and bade God bless him
with a tremulous voice.

"You must have plenty of courage," she said; "and you must never, never
give up your own way."

Walter was touched to the heart by this look of trouble on the innocent,
young-old face.

"I thought it was always right to give up one's own way," he said, in
the light tone which he had come to employ with her.

She made an effort to smile in response.

"Oh yes, oh yes, it's the fashion to say so. You are a self-denying
race, to believe yourselves; but this time you must not yield."

"To whom am I supposed to be about to yield?" he asked. "You may be sure
I sha'n't unless I can't help myself."

The tears overflowed her bright old eyes; her hands shook as they held
his.

"God bless you! God bless you!" she said. "I will do nothing but pray
for you, and you will tell me when you come back."

He left her lying back upon her cushions sobbing under her breath. All
this half-perplexed, half-amused the young man. She was a very strange
little creature, he felt, neither old nor young; there was no telling
the reason of her emotion. She was so much indulged in all her whims,
like a spoiled child, that perhaps these tears were only her regrets for
a lost playmate. At the same time Walter knew that this was not so, and
was angry with himself for the thought. But how find his way out of the
perplexity? He shook it off, which is always the easiest way; and soon
the landscape began to attract his attention, and he forgot by degrees
that there was anything very unusual in the circumstances of his
journey. It was not till the first long stage of this journey was over
that he was suddenly roused to a recollection of everything involved, by
the appearance of Symington at the carriage window, respectfully
requesting to know whether he had wanted anything. Walter had not
remembered, or if he had remembered had thought no more of it, that this
quietly officious retainer had taken all trouble from him at the
beginning of his journey, as he had done during his stay in Mr.
Milnathort's house.

"What! are you here?" he said, with surprise, and a mixture of amusement
and offence.

"I beg your pardon, my lord," said Symington, with profound and serious
respect, yet always a twinkle in his eye, "but as the other man did not
turn up--and your lordship could scarcely travel without some
attendance----"

He had to rush behind to get his place in the train in the midst of his
sentence, and Walter was left to think it over alone. In the balance
between anger and amusement the latter fortunately won the day. The
comic side of the matter came uppermost. It seemed to him very droll
that he should be taken possession of, against his will, by the valet
who professed an attachment to the race, not to the individual members
of it, whose head was garlanded with crape in the quaint Scotch way for
Walter's predecessor, and who had "identified himself with the
Erradeens." He reminded himself that he was in the country of Caleb
Balderstone and Ritchie Moniplies, and he resigned himself to
necessity. Symington's comic yet so respectful consciousness that "the
other man" was a mere imagination, was joke enough to secure his pardon,
and Walter felt that though the need of attendance was quite new in his
life, that it might be well on his arrival in a strange country and a
lonely ruined house, to have some one with him who was not ignorant
either of the locality or the household.

The country increased in interest as he went on, and by and by he forgot
himself in gazing at the mountains which appeared in glimpses upon the
horizon, then seemed to draw nearer, closing in upon the road, which led
along by the head of one loch after another, each encompassed by its
circle of hills. Walter knew very little about Scotland. He thought it a
barren and wild country, all bleak and gloomy, and the lavish vegetation
of the west filled him with surprise and admiration. The sun was near
its setting when the railway journey came to an end, and he found
himself at a village station, from which a coach ran to Kinloch Houran.
It appeared that there was no other vehicle to be had, and though it was
cold there was nothing else for it but to clamber up on the top of the
rude coach, which was a sort of _char-à-banc_ without any interior.
Walter felt that it would become him ill, notwithstanding his new rank,
to grumble at the conveyance, upon which there mounted nimbly a girl
whom he had remarked when leaving Edinburgh, and whom he had watched for
at all the pauses of the journey. He thought her the very impersonation
of all he had ever heard of Scotch beauty, and so would most observers
to whom Scotland is a new country. The native Scot is aware that there
are as many brown locks as golden, and as many dark maidens as fair ones
in his own country; but notwithstanding, to the stranger it is the fair
who is the type. This young lady was warmly clothed in dark tweed, of
the ruddy heathery hue which is now so general, not long enough to
conceal her well-shod feet, closely fitting, and adapted for constant
walking and movement. She seemed to be met by friends all along the
route. From the carriage window Walter saw her look out with little
cries of pleasure. "Oh, is that you, Jack?" "Oh, Nelly, where are you
going?" "Oh, come in here, there is room in this carriage," and such
like. She was always leaning out to say a word to somebody, either of
farewell or welcome. "You will remember me to your mother," old
gentlemen would call to her, as the train went on. Walter was greatly in
want of amusement, and he was at the age when a girl is always
interesting. She became to him the heroine of the journey. He felt that
he was collecting a great deal of information about her as they
travelled on, and had begun to wonder whether he should ever find out
who she was, or see any more of her, when he perceived her, to his
delight, getting out, as he himself did, at Baldally. She was met by a
respectable woman servant, who took possession of her baggage, while the
young lady herself ran across the road to the coach, and with a hearty
greeting to John the coachman darted up to the seat immediately behind
him, where her maid presently joined her. Walter, and a personage of the
commercial traveller class, shared the coachman's seat in front, and
Symington and some other humbler passengers sat behind. The coach was
adapted for summer traffic, so that there were several lines of empty
seats between the two sets of travellers. It gave Walter a great deal of
pleasure to hear the soft voice of his fellow-traveller pouring forth,
low yet quite audible, an account of her journey to her maid, who was
evidently on the most confidential terms with her young mistress.

"Has mamma missed me--much?" she asked after the little Odyssey was
over.

"Oh, Miss Oona, to ask that," cried the woman; "how should we no miss
you?" and then there ensued a number of details on the home side. The
girl had been on a visit in Edinburgh, and had gone to balls, and "seen
everything." On the other hand many small matters, faithfully reported,
had filled up the time of separation. Walter listened to all this
innocent interchange with great amusement and interest as the coach made
its way slowly up the ascents of the hilly road. It was not in itself an
agreeable mode of progression: the wind was icy cold, and swept through
and through the unfortunates who faced it in front, sharpening into
almost absolute needle points of ice when the pace quickened, and the
noisy, jolting vehicle lumbered down the further side of a hill,
threatening every moment to pitch the passengers into the heathery bog
on one side or the other. He tried to diminish his own discomfort by the
thought that he took off the icy edge of the gale and sheltered the
little slim creature in her close ulster behind, about whose shoulders
the maid had wound the snowy mass of a great white knitted shawl. The
low sun was in their faces as they toiled and rattled along, and the
clear wintry blue of the sky was already strewn with radiant rosy masses
of cloud. When they reached the highest point of the road the dazzling
gleam of the great loch lying at their feet and made into a mirror of
steel by the last blaze of the sun before it disappeared, dazzled the
young man, who could see nothing except the cold intolerable brightness;
but in a moment more the scene disclosed itself. Hills all purple in the
sunset, clothed with that ineffable velvet down which softens every
outline, opened out on either side, showing long lines of indistinct
green valleys and narrower ravines that ran between, all converging
towards the broad and noble inland sea fringed with dark woods and
broken with feathery islands, which was the centre of the landscape. The
wonderful colour of the sky reflected in the loch, where everything
found a reflection, and every knoll and island floated double, changed
the character of the scene and neutralised the dazzling coldness of the
great water-mirror. Walter's involuntary exclamation at this sight
stopped for a moment all the conversation going on. "By Jove," he said,
"how glorious!" They all stopped talking, the coachman, the traveller,
the woman behind, and looked at him. Big John the driver, who knew
everybody, eyed him with a slightly supercilious air, as one who felt
that the new-comer could not be otherwise than contemptible, more or
less, even though his sentiments were irreproachable. "Ay, sir--so
that's your opinion? most folk have been beforehand with ye," said John.

The commercial traveller added, condescendingly, "It is cold weather for
touring, sir; but it's a grand country, as ye say." And then they
resumed their conversation.

The young lady behind was far more sympathetic. She made a distinct
pause, and when she spoke again it was with a flattering adoption of
Walter's tone to point out to her companion how beautiful the scene was.

"The isle is floating too, Mysie--look! If we could get there soon
enough we might land upon one of those rosy clouds."

Walter gave a grateful glance behind him, and felt that he was
understood.

"That is just your poetry, Miss Oona," said the maid; "but, bless me, I
have never told ye: there has been the light lighted in the castle these
two nights past. We have just thought upon you all the time, and how
much taken up you would be about it, your mamma and me."

"The light on the castle!" cried the young lady; and at this the
coachman, turning slightly round, entered into the conversation.

"That has it," he said; "I can back her up in that; just as clear and as
steady as a star. There are many that say they never can see it; but
they would be clever that had not seen it these two past nights."

"Who says they cannot see it?" said the girl, indignantly.

John gave a little flick to his leader, which made the whole machine
vibrate and roll.

"Persons of the newfangled kind that believe in nothing," he said. "They
will tell ye it cannot be--so how can you see it? though it is glinting
in their faces all the time."

"You are meaning me, John," said the traveller on the box-seat; "and
there's truth in what you say. I've seen what you call the light, and no
doubt it has the appearance of a light; but if ye tell me it's something
supernatural, there can be no doubt I will answer ye that there's
nothing supernatural. If you were to tell me ye had seen a ghost, I
would just reply in the same way. No, my man, I'm not impeachin' your
veracity. You saw something, I'll allow; but no' a ghost, for there are
no ghosts to see."

"That's just an awfu' easy way of settlin' the question," said the maid
from behind--and then she went on in a lower tone: "This will be the
third night since it began, and we've a' seen it on the Isle. Hamish,
he says the new lord maun be of a dour kind to need so many warnings.
And he's feared ill will come of it; but I say the new lord, no' bein'
here away nor of this country at all, how is he to ken?"

The girl's voice was now quite low, almost a whisper: but Walter being
immediately in front of her could still hear. "Has anything been heard,"
she said, "of the new lord?"

"Very little, Miss Oona, only that he's a young lad from the south with
no experience, and didna even know that he was the heir; so how could he
ken? as I say to Hamish. But Hamish he insists that it's in the blood,
and that he would ken by instinck; and that it shows an ill-will, and
ill will come of it."

"If I were he," cried the girl, "I would do the same. I would not be
called like that from the end of the world wherever I was."

"Oh, whisht, Miss Oona. It is such an auld, auld story; how can the like
of you say what should be done?"

"I would like myself," said the traveller, "to come to the bottom of
this business. What is it for, and who has the doing of it? The moment
you speak of a light ye pre-suppose a person that lights it and mainy
adjuncks and accessories. Now there's nobody, or next to nobody, living
in that auld ruin. It's some rendeyvouss, I can easily understand that.
The days of conspiracies are gone by, or I would say it was something
against the state; but whatever it is, it must have a purpose, and
mortal hands must do it, seeing there are no other. I have heard since
ever I began to travel this country of the Kinloch Houran light, but I
never heard a reason assigned."

"It's the living lord," cried the maid, "as everybody knows! that is
called to meet with----"

Here the young lady interfered audibly--

"Mysie, not a word!" The woman's voice continued, stifled as if a hand
had been laid on her mouth.

"With them that are--with ane that is--I'm saying nothing, Miss Oona,
but what all the loch is well aware----"

"It's just a ferlie of this part of the world," said John the driver;
"nae need of entering into it with them that believe naething. I'm no
what ye call credulous mysel'; but when it comes to the evidence of a
man's ain senses----"

"And what have your senses said to ye, my fine fellow? that there's a
queer kind of a glimmer up upon the auld tower? So are there
corpse-candles, if I'm not mistaken, seen by the initiated upon your
burial isle--what do you call it?"

"And wha has a word to say gainst that?" cried the driver angrily;
whilst Mysie behind murmured--"It's well seen ye have naething to do
with any grave there."

Now Walter was as entirely free from superstition as any young man need
be; but when he heard the laugh with which the sceptic greeted these
protests, he had the greatest mind in the world to seize him by the
collar and pitch him into the bog below. Why? but the impulse was quite
unreasonable and defied explanation. He had as little faith in
corpse-candles as any bagman ever had, and the embarrassed and uneasy
consciousness he had that the end of his journey was inexplicable, and
its purpose ridiculous, led him much more to the conclusion that he was
being placed in a ludicrous position, than that there was anything
solemnly or awfully mysterious in it. Nevertheless, so far from ranging
himself upon the side of the enlightened modern who took the
common-sense view of these Highland traditions, his scorn and impatience
of him was beyond words. For his own part he had not been sufficiently
self-possessed to join in the discussion; but at this moment he ventured
a question--

"Is this old castle you speak of--" here he paused not knowing how to
shape his inquiry; then added, "uninhabited?" for want of anything
better to say.

"Not altogether," said John; "there is auld Macalister and his wife that
live half in the water, half out of the water. And it's the story in the
parish that there are good rooms; aye ready for my lord. But I can tell
ye naething about that, for I'm always on the road, and I see nothing
but a wheen tourists in the summer, that are seeking information, and
have none to give, puir creatures. There's a new lord just come to the
title; ye will maybe have met with him if ye're from the south, for he's
just an English lad."

"England, my man John, is a wide road," said the traveller; "there are
too many for us all to know each other as ye do in a parish; this
gentleman will tell ye that."

John's satirical explanation that he had not suspected Mr. Smith, whose
northern accent was undoubted, of being an Englishman, saved Walter from
any necessity of making a reply; and by this time the coach was rattling
down upon a little homely inn, red-roofed and white-walled, which stood
upon a knoll, overlooking the loch, and was reflected in all its
brightness of colour in that mirror. The ground shelved rapidly down to
the water-side, and there were several boats lying ready to put out into
the loch--one a ponderous ferry boat, another a smaller, but still
substantial and heavy, cobble, in which a man with a red shirt and
shaggy locks was standing up relieved against the light. Walter jumped
down hurriedly with the hope of being in time to give his hand to the
young lady, who perhaps had divined his purpose, for she managed to
alight on the other side and so balk him. The landlady of the little inn
had come out to the door, and there was a great sound of salutations and
exclamations of welcome. "But I mustna keep you, Miss Oona, and your
mamma countin' the moments; and there's two or three parcels," the woman
said. The air had begun to grow a little brown, as the Italians say,
that faint veil of gathering shade which is still not darkness, was
putting out by degrees the radiance of the sky, and as Walter stood
listening all the mingled sounds of the arrival rose together in a
similar mist of sound, through which he sought for the soft little
accents of the young lady's voice amid the noises of the unharnessing,
the horses' hoofs and ostler's pails, and louder tones. Presently he saw
her emerge from the group with her maid, laden with baskets and small
parcels, and embarking under the conduct of the man in the red shirt,
whom she greeted affectionately as Hamish, assume her place in the
stern, and the ropes of the rudder, with evident use and wont. To watch
her steer out into the darkening loch, into the dimness and cold, gave
the young man a vague sensation of pain. It seemed to him as if the last
possible link with the human and sympathetic was detaching itself from
him. He did not know her indeed, but it does not take a long time or
much personal knowledge to weave this mystic thread between one young
creature and another. Most likely, he thought, she had not so much as
noticed him: but she had come into the half-real dream of his existence,
and touched his hand, as it were, in the vague atmosphere which
separates one being from another. Now he was left with nothing around
him but the darkening landscape and the noisy little crowd about the
coach; no one who could give him any fellowship or encouragement in the
further contact which lay before him with the mysterious and unknown.

After a few moments the landlady came towards him, smoothing down her
white apron, which made a great point in the landscape, so broad was it
and so white. She smiled upon him with ingratiating looks.

"Will you be going north, sir?" she said; "or will you be biding for the
night? Before we dish up the dinner and put the sheets on the bed we
like to know."

"Who is that young lady that has just gone away?" said Walter, not
paying much attention; "and where is she going? It is late and cold for
the water. Do you ever get frozen here?"

"That is Miss Oona of the Isle," said the landlady; "but as I was
saying, sir, about the beds----"

"Are the islands inhabited then?" said Walter; "and where is Kinloch
Houran? Does one go there by water too?"

"No, Mistress Macgregor," said Symington's voice on the other side; "my
lord will not bide here to-night. I've been down to the beach, and there
is a boat there, but not your lordship's own, any more than there was a
carriage waiting at Baldally. We must just put our pride in our pockets,
my lord, and put up with what we can get. When your lordship's ready
we're all ready."

By this time Big John and all the others were standing in a group
staring at Lord Erradeen with all their eyes. John explained himself in
a loud voice, but with an evident secret sense of shame.

"Hoo was I to ken? A lord has nae business to scour the country like
that, like ony gangrel body--sitting on the seat just like the rest of
us--Mr. Smith and him and me. Lord! hoo was I to ken? If you hear nae
good of yourself, it is just your ain blame. I was thinking of no lord
or any such cattle. I was just thinking upon my beasts. As for a lord
that gangs about like yon, deceiving honest folk, I wouldna give that
for him," John said, snapping his finger and thumb. His voice sank at
the end, and the conclusion of the speech was but half audible. Mrs.
Macgregor interposing her round, soft intonation between the speaker and
the stranger.

"Eh, my lord, I just beg your pardon! I had no notion--and I hope your
lordship found them a' civil. Big John is certainly a little quick with
his tongue--"

"I hope you're not supposing, Mistress Macgregor, that his lordship
would fash himself about Big John," said Symington, who had now taken
the direction of affairs. Walter, to tell the truth, did not feel much
inclination to enter into the discussion. The gathering chill of the
night had got into his inner man. He went down towards the beach slowly
pondering, taking every step with a certain hesitation. It seemed to him
that he stood on the boundary between the even ground of reality and
some wild world of fiction which he did not comprehend, but had a
mingled terror and hatred of. Behind him everything was homely and poor
enough; the light streamed out of the open doors and uncovered windows,
the red roof had a subdued glow of cheerfulness in the brown air, the
sounds about were cheerful, full of human bustle and movement, and
mutual good offices. The men led the horses away with a certain
kindness; the landlady, with her white apron, stopped to say a friendly
word to Big John, and interchanged civilities with the other humble
passengers who were bringing her no custom, but merely passing her door
to the ferry-boat that waited to take them across the loch. Everywhere
there was a friendly interchange, a gleam of human warmth and mutual
consolation. But before him lay the dark water, with a dark shadow of
mingled towers and trees lying upon it at some distance. He understood
vaguely that this was Kinloch Houran, and the sight of it was not
inviting. He did not know what it might be that should meet him there,
but whatever it was it repelled and revolted him. He seemed to be about
to overpass some invisible boundary of truth and to venture into the
false, into regions in which folly and trickery reigned. There was in
Walter's mind all the sentiment of his century towards the supernatural.
He had an angry disbelief in his mind, not the tranquil contempt of the
indifferent. His annoyed and irritated scorn perhaps was nearer faith
than he supposed; but he was impatient of being called upon to give any
of his attention to those fables of the past which imposture only could
keep up in the present. He felt that he was going to be made the victim
of some trick or other. The country people evidently believed, indeed,
as was natural enough to their simplicity; but Walter felt too certain
that he would see the mechanism behind the most artful veil to believe
it possible that he himself could be taken in, even for a moment. And
he had no desire to find out the contemptible imposture. He felt the
whole business contemptible; the secluded spot, the falling night, the
uninhabited place, were all part of the jugglery. Should he voluntarily
make himself a party to it, and walk into the snare with his eyes open?
He felt sure, indeed, that he would remain with his eyes open all the
time, and was not in the least likely to submit to any black art that
might be exercised upon him. But he paused, and asked himself was it
consistent with the dignity of a reasonable creature, a full-grown man,
to allow himself to be drawn into any degrading contact with this
jugglery at all?

The boat lay on the beach with his baggage already in it, and Symington
standing respectful awaiting his master's pleasure. Symington, no doubt,
was the god out of the machinery who had the _fin mot_ of everything and
all the strings in his hand. What if he broke the spell peremptorily and
retired to the ruddy fireside of the inn and defied family tradition? He
asked himself again what would come of it? and replied to himself
scornfully that nothing could come of it. What law could force him to
observe an antiquated superstition? It was folly to threaten him with
impossible penalties. And even if a thing so absurd could happen as that
he should be punished in purse or property for acting like a man of
sense instead of a fool, what then? The mere possibility of the risk
made Walter more disposed to incur it. It was monstrous and
insufferable that he should be made to carry out a tyrannical,
antiquated stipulation by any penalty of the law. It would be better to
fight it out once for all. All the sense of the kingdom would be with
him, and he did not believe that any judge could pronounce against him.
Here Symington called, with a slight tone of anxiety, "We are all ready,
my lord, and waiting." This almost decided Walter. He turned from the
beach, and made a few hasty steps up the slope.

But then he paused again, and turning round faced once more the
darkening water, the boat lying like a shadow upon the beach, the vague
figures of the men about it. The ferry-boat had pushed off and was
lumbering over the water with great oars going like bats' wings, and a
noisy human load. The other little vessel with that girl had almost
disappeared. He thought he could see in the darkness a white speck like
a bird, which was the white shawl that wrapped her throat and shoulders.
Her home lay somewhere in the centre of these dark waters, a curious
nest for such a creature. And his? He turned again towards the dark,
half-seen towers and gables. Some of them were so irregular in outline
that they could be nothing but ruins. He began to think of the past,
mute, out of date, harmless to affect the life that had replaced it,
which had taken refuge there. And he remembered his own argument about
the courtesy that the living owed to the dead. Well! if it was so, if it
was as a politeness, a courtesy to the past, it might be unworthy a
gentleman to refuse it. And perhaps when all was said it was just a
little cowardly to turn one's back upon a possible danger, upon what at
least the vulgar thought a danger. This decided him. He turned once
more, and with a few rapid steps reached the boat. Next moment they were
afloat upon the dark loch. There had been no wind to speak of on shore,
but the boat was soon struggling against a strong running current, and a
breeze which was like ice. The boatmen showed dark against the gleaming
loch, the rude little vessel rolled, the wind blew. In front of them
rose the dark towers and woods all black without a sign of human
habitation. Walter felt his heart rise at last with the sense of
adventure. It was the strangest way of entering upon a fine
inheritance.




CHAPTER X.


Kinloch Houran Castle stands out of the very waters of Loch Houran, with
its ruined gables and towers clothed with ivy. From the water it looked
like nothing but a roofless and deserted ruin. One tower in the centre
stood up above the jagged lines of the walls, with something that looked
like a ruined balcony or terrace commanding the landscape. The outline
was indistinct, for the trees that had got footing in the ruined
chambers below grew high and wild, veiling the means by which it was
sustained at that altitude: but the little platform itself was very
visible, surrounding the solid block of the tower, which showed no
window or opening, but looked as if it might yet outlive centuries. As
the boat approached, Walter saw the rowers whisper, and give significant
looks at Symington, who sat respectfully on one of the cross seats, not
to put himself in the way of his master, who occupied the other alone.
Hoarse whispers breathed about the other end of the boat, and Symington
was progged in the shoulders with an occasional oar. "Will ye no' be
letting him see't?" the rowers said. Walter's faculties were eagerly
acute in the strangeness of everything around him; the sense that he was
going to an impossible house--to a ruin--on an impossible errand, seemed
to keep him on the alert in every particular of his being. He could see
through the dusk, he could hear through the whistle of the wind and the
lashing of the water upon the boat's side, which was like the roar of a
mimic storm; and he was not even insensible to the comic element in
Symington's face, who waved away the oar with which he was poked, and
replied with words and frowns and looks full of such superiority of
information, that a burst of sudden nervous laughter at the sight
relieved Walter's excitement. He felt that a thrill of disapproval at
this went through the boat, and the men in the bow shook their bonnets
as they rowed.

"It's nothing to laugh at, my lord," said old Symington, "though I'm not
one--and I make no question but your lordship is not one--to lose my
presence o' mind. Yon's the phenomenon that they wanted me to call your
lordship's attention to," he added, jerking his arm, but without turning
his head, in the direction of the tower.

"The light?" Walter said. He had been about to ask what the meaning of
it might be. It had not been visible at all when they started, but for
the last moment or two had been growing steadily. The daylight was
waning every minute, and no doubt (he thought) it was this that made the
light more evident. It shone from the balcony or high roof-terrace
which surrounded the old tower. It was difficult to distinguish what it
was, or identify any lamp or beacon as the origin of it. It seemed to
come from the terrace generally, a soft, extended light, with nothing
fiery in it, no appearance of any blaze or burning, but a motionless,
clear shining, which threw a strange glimmer upwards upon the solid mass
of the tower, and downwards upon the foliage, which was black and
glistening, and upon the surface of the water. "Yon's the phenomenon,"
said Symington, pointing with a jerk of his elbow. The light brought out
the whole mass of rugged masonry and trees from the rest of the
landscape, and softly defined it against the darker background.

"How is it done?" said the young man, simply. He perceived the moment
after that his tone was like that of the bagman on the coach, and
shivered at the thought. So soft and steady was the light that it had
not seemed to him extraordinary at all.

"What do you mean by a phenomenon?" he asked, hastily. He remembered
suddenly that the young lady on the coach had spoken of this light, and
taken it, so to speak, under her protection.

"If your lordship has ainy desire to inquire into my opinion," said old
Symington, "though I doubt that's little likely, I would say it was just
intended to work on the imagination. Now and then, indeed, it's useful
in the way of a sign--like a person waving to you to come and speak;
but to work on the imagination, that's what I would say."

Walter looked up at the light which threw a faint glimmer across the
dark water, showing the blackness of the roughened ripple, over which
they were making their way, and bringing into curious prominence the
dark mass of the building rising out of it. It was not like the moon, it
was more distinct than starlight, it was paler than a torch: nor was
there any apparent central point from which it came. There was no
electric light in those days, nor was Loch Houran a probable spot for
its introduction: but the clear colourless light was of that
description. It filled the visitor with a vague curiosity, but nothing
more.

"To work on--whose imagination? and with what object?" he said.

But as he asked the question the boat shot forward into the narrow part
of the loch, and rounded the corner of the ruin. Anything more hopeless
as a place to which living passengers, with the usual encumbrances of
luggage, were going, could not well be conceived; but after a few
minutes' rowing, the boat ran in to some rude steps on the other side of
the castle, where there were traces of a path leading up across the
rough grass to a partially visible door. All was so dark by this time
that it was with difficulty that Walter found the landing; when he had
got ashore, and his portmanteau had been put out on the bank, the men in
the boat pushed off with an energy and readiness which proved their
satisfaction in getting clear of the castle and its traditions. To find
himself left there, with an apparently ruined house behind him, his
property at his feet, his old servant by his side, night closing in
around, and the dark glistening water lapping up on the stones at his
feet, was about as forlorn a situation as could be imagined.

"Are we to pass the night here?" he said, in a voice which could not
help being somewhat querulous.

The sound of a door opening behind interrupted his words, and turning
round he saw an old man standing in the doorway, with a small lamp in
his hand. He held it up high over his head to see who the new-comers
were; and Walter, looking round, saw a bowed and aged figure--a pale old
face, which might have been made out of ivory, so bloodless was it, the
forehead polished and shining, some grey locks escaping at the side of a
black skull-cap, and eyes looking out keenly into the darkness.

"It is just his lordship, Macalister," said old Symington.

The young man, who was so strange to it all, stood with a sort of
helplessness between the two old men who were familiar with each other
and the place and all its customs.

"Come away, then, come away," cried the guardian of the house, with a
shrill voice that penetrated the stillness sharply. "What are ye biding
there for in the dark?"

"And who's to carry up my lord's portmanteau?" said Symington.

"His portmanteau!" cried the other, with a sort of eldritch laugh. "Has
he come to bide?"

This colloquy held over him exasperated Walter, and he seized the
portmanteau hastily, forgetting his dignity.

"Lend a hand, Symington, and let us have no more talk," he said.

There is a moment when the most forlorn sensations and the most dismal
circumstances become either ludicrous or irritating. The young man shook
off his sense of oppression and repugnance as he hastened up the slope
to the door, while the lantern, flashing fitfully about, showed now the
broken path, now the rough red masonry of the ruin, which was scarcely
less unlike a ruin on this side than on the other. The door gave
admittance into a narrow passage only, out of which a spiral staircase
ascended close to the entrance, the passage itself apparently leading
away into the darkness to a considerable distance. At the end of it
stood a woman with a lighted candle peering out at the stranger as the
man had done. He seemed to realise the stones which every one has read
of a belated traveller unwillingly received into some desolate inn,
which turns out to be the headquarters of a robber-band, and where the
intruder must be murdered ere the morning.

"This is your way, my lord," said the shrill old man, leading the way up
the spiral stair. The whole scene was like a picture. The woman holding
up her light at the end of the long passage, the old man with his lamp,
the dark corners full of silence and mystery, the cold wind blowing as
through an icy ravine. And the sensations of the young man, who had not
even had those experiences of adventure which most young men have in
these travelling days, whom poverty and idleness had kept at home in
tame domestic comfort, were very strange and novel. He seemed to himself
to be walking into a romance, not into any real place, but into some old
storybook, a mystery of Udolpho, an antiquated and conventional region
of gloom and artificial alarms.

"Come this way, my lord; come this way," said the old man; "the steps
are a bit worn, for they're auld, auld--as auld as the house. But we
hope you'll find everything as comfortable as the circumstances will
permit. We have had just twa three days to prepare, my mistress and me;
but we've done our best, as far," he added, "as the circumstances will
permit. This way, this way, my lord."

At the head of the stair everything was black as night. The old man's
lamp threw his own somewhat fantastic shadow upon the wall of a narrow
corridor as he held it up to guide the new-comer. Close to the top of
the staircase, however, there opened a door, through which a warm light
was showing, and Walter, to his surprise, found himself in a
comfortably-furnished room with a cheerful fire, and a table covered
for dinner, a welcome end to the discomfort and gloom of the arrival.
The room was low, but large, and there were candles on the mantelpiece
and table which made a sort of twinkling illumination in the midst of
the dark panelled walls and dark furniture. The room was lined with
books at one end. It was furnished with comfortable sofas and chairs of
modern manufacture. There was a curious dim mirror over the mantelshelf
in a heavy gilt frame of old carving, one or two dim old portraits hung
opposite, the curtains were drawn, the fire was bright, the white
tablecloth with an old-fashioned silver vase in the middle, and the
candles burning, made a cheerful centre of light. At the further end was
another door, open, which admitted to a bed-room, dim, but comfortable
in the firelight. All this was encouraging. Walter threw himself into a
chair with a sense that the situation altogether was improving. Things
cannot be so very bad when there is a fire and lights, and a prospect of
dinner. He began to laugh at himself, when he had taken off his coat,
and felt the warmth of the glowing fire. Everything around him was
adapted for comfort. There was a little want of light which left all the
corners mysterious, and showed the portraits dimly, like half-seen
spectators, looking down from the wall; but the comfortable was much
more present than the weird and uncanny which had so much predominated
on his arrival. And when a dinner, which was very good and carefully
cooked, and a bottle of wine, which, though he had not very much skill
in that subject, Walter knew to be costly and fine, had been served with
noiseless care by Symington, the young man began to recover his spirits,
and to think of the tradition which required his presence here, as silly
indeed, but without harm. After dinner he seated himself by the fire to
think over the whole matter. It was not yet a fortnight since this
momentous change had happened in his life. Before that he had been
without importance, without use in the world, with little hope, with
nothing he cared for sufficiently to induce him to exert himself one way
or another. Now after he had passed this curious probation, whatever it
was, what a life opened before him! He did not even know how important
it was, how much worth living. It shone before him indistinctly as a
sort of vague, general realisation of all dreams. Wealth--that was the
least of it; power to do whatever he pleased; to affect other people's
lives, to choose for himself almost whatever pleased him. He thought of
Parliament, even of government, in his ignorance: he thought of travel,
he thought of great houses full of gaiety and life. It was not as yet
sufficiently realised to make him decide on one thing or another. He
preferred it as it was, vague--an indefinite mass of good things and
glories to come. Only this ordeal, or whatever it was--those few days
more or less that he was bound to remain at Kinloch Houran, stood
between him and his magnificent career. And after all, Kinloch Houran
was nothing very terrible. It might be like the mysteries of Udolpho
outside; but all the mysteries of Udolpho turned out, he remembered,
quite explainable, and not so very alarming after all; and these rooms,
which bore the traces of having been lived in very lately, and which
were quite adapted to be lived in, did not seem to afford much scope for
the mysterious. There were certain points, indeed, in which they were
defective, a want of air, something which occasionally caught at his
respiration, and gave him a sort of choked and stifled sensation; but
that was natural enough, so carefully closed as everything was, curtains
drawn, every draught warded off. Sometimes he had an uneasy feeling as
if somebody had come in behind him and was hanging about the back of his
chair. On one occasion he even went so far as to ask sharply, "Is it
you, Symington?" but, looking back, was ashamed of himself, for of
course there was nobody there. He changed his seat, however, so as to
face the door, and even went the length of opening it, and looking out
to see if there was any one about. The little corridor seemed to ramble
away into a darkness so great that the light of his candle did no more
than touch its surface--the spiral staircase looked like a well of
gloom. This made him shiver slightly, and a half-wish to lock his door
came over him, of which he felt ashamed as he turned back into the
cheerful light.

After all, it was nothing but the sensation of loneliness which made
this impression. He went back to his chair and once more resumed his
thoughts--or rather was it not his thoughts--nay, his fancies--that
resumed him, and fluttered about and around, presenting to him a hundred
swiftly changing scenes? He saw visions of his old life, detached scenes
which came suddenly up through the darkness and presented themselves
before him--a bit of Sloebury High Street, with a group of his former
acquaintances now so entirely separated from him; the little
drawing-room at the cottage, with Julia Herbert singing him a song;
Underwood's rooms on that particular night when he had gone in, in
search of something like excitement, and had found everything so dull
and flat. None of these scenes had any connection with his new beginning
in life. They all belonged to the past, which was so entirely past and
over. But these were the scenes which came with a sort of perversity,
all broken, changing like badly managed views in a magic lantern,
produced before him without any will of his. There was a sort of
bewildering effect in the way in which they swept along, one effacing
another, all of them so alien to the scene in which he found himself. He
had to get up at last, shaking himself as free of the curious whirl of
unwonted imagination as he could. No doubt his imagination was excited;
but happily not, he said to himself, by anything connected with the
present scene in which he found himself. Had it been roused by these
strange surroundings, by the darkness and silence that were about him,
by the loneliness to which he was so unused, he felt that there was no
telling what he might see or think he saw; but fortunately it was not
in this way that his imagination worked. His pulse was quick, however,
his heart beating, a quite involuntary excitement in all his bodily
faculties. He got up hastily and went to the bookshelves, where he
found, to his surprise, a large collection of novels and light
literature. It seemed to Walter that his predecessor, whom he had never
seen--the former Lord Erradeen, who inhabited these rooms not very long
ago--had been probably, like himself, anxious to quench the rising of
his fancy in the less exciting course of a fictitious drama, the
conventional excitements of a story. He looked over the shelves with a
curious sympathy for this unknown person, whom indeed he had never
thought much upon before. Did that unknown know who was to succeed him?
Did he ever speculate upon Walter as Walter was now doing upon him? He
turned over the books with a strange sense of examining the secrets of
his predecessor's mind. They were almost all books of adventure and
excitement. He took down, after a moment, a volume of Dumas, and
returned to his easy-chair by the fire, to lose himself in the
breathless ride of d'Artagnan and the luckless fortunes of the three
companions. It answered the purpose admirably. A sudden lull came over
his restless fancy. He was in great comfort externally, warmed and fed
and reposing after a somewhat weary day, and the spell of the great
story-teller got hold of him. He was startled out of this equable calm
when Symington came in to light the candles in his bed-room and bring
hot water, and offer his services generally. Symington regarded him with
an approval which he did not think it worth his while to dissemble.

"That's right, my lord, that's right," he said. "Reading's a very fine
thing when you have too much to occupy your thoughts."

Walter was amused by this deliverance, and happily not impatient of it.
"That is a new reason for reading," he said.

"But it is a real just one, if your lordship will permit me to say so.
Keep you to your book, my lord; it's just fine for putting other things
out of your head. It's Dumas's you're reading? I've tried that French
fellow myself, but I cannot say that I made head or tail of him. He
would have it that all that has happened in history was just at the
mercy of a wheen adventurers, two or three vagrants of Frenchmen. No,
no. I may believe a great deal, but I'm not likely to believe that."

"I see you are a critic, Symington; and do you read for the same reason
that you have been suggesting to me?--because you have too much to
occupy your thoughts?"

"Well, pairtly, my lord, and pairtly just in my idle hours to pass the
time. I have made up your fire and lighted the candles, and everything
is in order. Will I wait upon your lordship till you're inclined for
your bed? or will I----" Symington made a significant pause, which it
was not very difficult to interpret.

"You need not wait," Walter said; and then, with an instinct which he
was half ashamed of, he asked hurriedly, "Whereabouts do you sleep?"

"That is just about the difficulty," said old Symington. "I'm rather out
of call if your lordship should want anything. The only way will just be
to come down the stairs, if your lordship will take the trouble, and
ring the big bell. It would waken a' the seven sleepers if it was rung
at their lug: and I'm not so ill to waken when there is noise enough.
But ye have everything to your hand, my lord. If you'll just give a
glance into the other room, I can let you see where everything is. There
is the spirit-lamp, not to say a small kettle by the fire, and
there's----"

"That will do," said Walter. "I shall not want anything more to-night."

The old servant went away with a glance round the room, in which Walter
thought there was some anxiety, and stopped again at the door to say
"Good night, my lord. It's not that I am keen for my bed--if your
lordship would like me to bide, or even to take a doze upon a chair----"

"Go to bed, old Sym.," said the young man with a laugh. The idea of
finding a protector in Symington was somewhat ludicrous. But these
interruptions disturbed him once more, and brought back his excitement:
he felt a sort of pang as he heard the old servant's heavy step going
down the winding stair, and echoing far away, as it seemed, into the
bowels of the earth. Then that extreme and blighting silence which is
like a sort of conscious death came upon the place. The thick curtains
shut out every sound of wind and water outside as they shut out every
glimpse of light. Walter heard his pulse in his ears, his heart thumping
like the hammer of a machine. The whole universe seemed concentrated in
that only living breathing thing, which was himself. He tried to resume
his book, but the spell of the story was broken. He could no longer
follow the fortunes of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis. Walter Methven thrust
himself in front of these personages, and, though he was not half so
amusing, claimed a superior importance by right of those pulses that
clanged in his head like drums beating. He said to himself that he was
very comfortable, that he had never expected to be so well off. But he
could not regain his composure or sense of well-being. It was a little
better when he went into his bed-room, the mere movement and passage
from one room to another being of use to him. The sense of oppression
and stagnation, however, soon became almost greater here than in the
sitting-room. One side of the room was entirely draped in close-drawn
curtains, so that it was impossible to make out even where the windows
were. He drew them aside with some trouble, for the draperies were very
heavy, but not to much advantage. At first it seemed to him that there
were no windows at all; then he caught sight of something like a recess
high in the wall; and climbing up, found the hasp of a rough shutter,
which covered a small square window built into a cave of the deep
masonry. That this should be the only means of lighting an almost
luxurious sleeping chamber, bewildered him more and more; but it would
not open, and let in no air, and the atmosphere felt more stifling than
ever in this revelation of the impossibility of renewing it. Finally, he
went to bed with a sort of rueful sense that there was the last citadel
and refuge of a stranger beset by imaginations in so weird and
mysterious a place. He did not expect to sleep, but he determined that
he would not, at least, be the sport of his own fancies.

It astonished Walter beyond measure to find himself waking in broad
daylight, with Symington moving softly about the room, and a long
window, the existence of which he had never suspected, facing him as he
looked up from his pillows, after a comfortable night's sleep. Mingled
shame and amusement made him burst into an uneasy laugh, as he realised
this exceedingly easy end of his tribulations.

"Mrs. Macalister," said Symington, "would like well to know when your
lordship is likely to be ready, to put down the trout at the right
moment: for it's an awful pity to spoil a Loch Houran trout."




CHAPTER XI.


To insist upon the difference between an impression made when we arrive,
tired and excited at night, in a strange place, and that which the same
scene produces in the early freshness and new life of the morning, would
be to deliver ourselves over to the reign of the truism. It would,
however, have been impossible to feel this with more force than Walter
felt it. His sensations of alarm and excitement struck him not only as
unjustifiable but ludicrous. He laughed once more when he came out of
his chamber into the warm and genial room, which had seemed to him so
mysterious and dark on the previous night. There were windows upon
either side of the fire-place, each in a deep recess like a small room,
so great was the thickness of the wall. They looked out upon the
mountains, upon the narrow end of the loch, all bubbling and sparkling
in the sunshine, and down upon the little grassy slope rough and uncared
for, yet green, which was the only practicable entrance to the castle.
The windows were not large, and the room still not very light, though
the sunshine which poured in at one side made a most picturesque effect
of light and shade. The portraits on the wall were better than they had
seemed, and had lost the inquisitive air of dissatisfied inspection
which Walter's imagination had given them. The book-shelves at the end
gave relief to the room, with their cheerful gilding and the subdued
tone of their bindings. Walter thought of the chamber in the _Pilgrim's
Progress_ turned towards the sunrising, the name of which was Peace. But
peace was not the thing most suggested at Kinloch Houran by any of the
accessories about, and a vision of the chilliness of the gray light in
the afternoon, and the force of the east wind when it came, crossed his
mind in true nineteenth century criticism of the more poetical view. But
in the mean time, the policy of enjoying the present was undeniable,
especially when that present took the form of a Loch Houran trout, fresh
from the water, and cooked as fish only are under such conditions. He
looked back upon the agitations of the evening, and the reluctant angry
sentiment with which he had come to this old house of his family, with
amused incredulity and shame. To think that he could be such an
impressionable fool! He dismissed it all lightly from his mind as he
hurried over his breakfast, with the intention of getting out at once
and exploring everything about. He had even newspapers upon his table
along with the fresh scones, the new-made butter, all the fresh
provisions of the meal. To be sure, it was Glasgow and not London from
which they came--but the world's history was no less instant in them,
flashing from all parts of the world into this home of the ancient
ages.

His first inspection was of the castle itself, which he undertook under
the auspices of old Symington and old Macalister, both eager to explain
and describe what it had been, as well as what it was. What it was did
not consist of very much. "My lord's rooms," those in which he had spent
the night, were the only habitable portion of the great pile. He was led
through the roofless hall, with its musicians' gallery still perched
high up and overshadowed with canopies of ashen boughs, vigorous though
leafless; the guard-room, the supposed kitchen with its large chimney,
the oblong space from east to west which was supposed to have been the
chapel. All was a little incoherent in the completeness of ruin. There
was little of the stimulation of family pride to be got out of those
desolate places. The destruction was too complete to leave room even for
the facile web of imagination. The Crusader, about whom there was a
legend a little too picturesque and romantic to be true, or the lady who
was only saved by his sudden appearance from unfaithfulness, were not
more easy to conjure up within the inclosure of those shapeless walls
than on any unremarkable spot where the story might have been told.
Walter grew a little weary as Symington and the old guardian of the
house argued as to which was this division of the castle, and which
that. He left them discussing the question, and climbed up by a rude
stair which had been half improvised from the ruined projections of the
masonry, to the crumbling battlements above. From thence he looked down
upon a scene which was older than the oldest ruin, yet ever fresh in
perennial youth: the loch stretched out like a great mirror under the
wintry blue of the sky and the dazzling blaze of the sunshine,
reflecting everything, every speck of cloud above and every feathery
twig and minute island below. There was no need to make believe, to
simulate unfelt enthusiasm, or endeavour to connect with unreal
associations this wonderful and glorious scene. Perhaps there was in his
mind something more in harmony with the radiance of nature than with the
broken fragments of a history which he had no skill to piece up into
life again. He stood gazing upon the scene in a rapture of silent
delight. The hills in their robes of velvet softness, ethereal
air-garments more lovely than any tissue ever woven in mortal loom, drew
aside on either hand in the blue space and dazzling atmosphere to open
out this liquid vale of light, with its dark specks of islets, its
feathery banks, all rustling with leafless trees. Every outline and
detail within its reach was turned into a line, a touch, more sweet by
the flattering glory of the still water in which everything was double.
The morning freshness and sheen were still unbroken. It was like a new
creation lying contemplating itself in the first ecstasy of
consciousness. Walter was gazing upon this wonderful scene when the
sharp voice of old Macalister made him start, and take a step aside
which almost had serious consequences: for he stepped back unwarily
upon the crumbling wall, and might have fallen but for the violent grip
of the old man, who clutched him like a shaky Hercules, with a grasp
which was vigorous yet trembling.

"Lord's sake take care," he cried. His face flushed, then paled again
with genuine emotion. "Do you think we have a store of young lads like
you, that you will risk your life like yon? and just in the place where
the lady fell. You have given me such a start I canna breathe," he
cried.

To tell the truth, looking back upon it, Walter himself did not like the
look of the precipice which he had escaped.

"Where the lady fell?" he asked with a little eagerness, as he came to
the battlement.

"Oh ay. I seldom bother my head about what's happened, so to speak, two
or three days since. It was just there she fell. She has been bedridden
ever since, from a' I hear, which just shows the folly of venturing
about an auld place without somebody that knows how to take care of ye.
What would have come of you yoursel', that is the maister of a', if auld
Sandy Macalister had not been there?"

"Thank you, Macalister, you shall find me grateful," said Walter; "but
who was this lady? two or three days ago, did you say?"

"Years--years; did I no say years? Oh ay, it may be longer, twenty or
thirty. I'm meaning just naething in a life like mine. She had some
silly story of being frightened with a gentleman that she thought she
saw. They are keen about making up a story--women folk. She was just the
sister to the man of business, ye'll have heard of her--a pretty bit
thing, if that was of any consequence; but, Lord's sake, what's that
atween you and me, and you ignorant of everything?" the old man said.
"Do you see the chimneys yonder, and the gable end with the crow steps,
as they call it, just pushing out among the trees? That's just your ain
shooting-box--they call it Auchnasheen. I'll tell you the meanings of
the names another time. Out beyond yonder, the big house away at the
point, it's a new place built for his diversion by one of your new men.
Yon island far away that's bare and green is the island of Rest, where
all the loch was once buried: and atween us and that there's another
isle with a gable end among the trees which is just the last place
that's left to an auld race to plant their feet upon. It's a bonnie
piece of water; you that's come from the south you'll never have seen
the like. I'll tell you all the stories of the divers places, and how
they're connected with the Me'vens that are chiefs of Loch Houran; for I
wouldna give a button for that new-fangled title of the Lords Erradeen."

"It has lasted however for some centuries," said Walter, with a sudden
sense of displeasure which he felt to be absurd enough.

"And what is that in a family?" said old Macalister, "I think nothing of
it. A hundred years or two that never counts one way nor another; it's
nae antiquity. If that nonsense were true about the Warlock lord, he
would be but twa hundred and fifty at the present speaking, or
thereabouts, and a' that have ever thought they saw him represent him as
a fine personable man. I have never had that pleasure myself," the old
man said with his shrill laugh. "Where are you going, my young
gentleman? Ye'll just go down like a stane and end in a rattle of dust
and mortar, if you'll no be guided by me."

"Let you his lordship alone, Sandy," cried the voice of Symington,
intermingled with pants and sobs as he climbed up to the parapet. "Ye
must not occupy my lord's time with your old craiks. You would perhaps
like, my lord, to visit Auchnasheen, where the keeper will be on the
outlook: or may be it would be better to organise your day's shooting
for to-morrow, when you have lookit a little about you: or ye would
perhaps like to take a look at the environs, or see the factor, who is
very anxious as soon as your lordship has a moment--"

"Oh! and there is the minister that can tell ye a' about the
antiquities, my lord: and traces out the auld outline of the castle
grandly, till ye seem to see it in all its glory--"

"Or--" Symington had begun, when Walter turned at bay. He faced the old
men with a half-laughing defiance. "I see plenty of boats about," he
said. "I am going out to explore the loch. I want no attendance, or any
help, but that you will be good enough to leave me to myself."

"We'll do that, my lord. I will just run and cry upon Duncan that is
waiting about--"

The end of all this zeal and activity was that when Walter found himself
at last free and on the shining bosom of the loch, he was in a boat too
heavy for his own sole management, sharing the care of it with Duncan,
who was of a taciturn disposition and answered only when spoken to. This
made the arrangement almost as satisfactory as if he had been alone, for
Duncan was quite willing to obey and yield a hearty service without
disturbing his young master with either questions or remarks. He was a
large young man, strong and well knit though somewhat heavy, with a
broad smiling face, red and freckled, with honest blue eyes under sandy
eyelashes, and a profusion of strong and curly reddish hair. He beamed
upon Lord Erradeen with a sort of friendly admiration and awe,
answering, "Ay, my lord," and "No, my lord," always with the same smile
of general benevolence and readiness to comply with every desire. When
they had got beyond hail of the castle, from which Symington and
Macalister watched them anxiously, Duncan mutely suggested the elevation
of a mast and setting of the sail which the vessel was furnished with,
to which Walter assented with eagerness: and soon they were skimming
along before a light wind as if they had wings. And now began perhaps
the most pleasurable expedition that Walter had ever made in his life.
Escaped from the ruinous old pile, within which he had feared he knew
not what, escaped too from the observation and inspection of the two old
men so much better acquainted with the history of his family than
himself, whom he felt to be something between keepers and
schoolmasters--fairly launched forth upon the world, with nothing to
consult but his own pleasure, Walter felt his spirits rise to any height
of adventure. There was not indeed any very wild adventure probable, but
he was not much used to anything of the kind, and the sense of freedom
and freshness in everything was intoxicating to the young man. The small
boat, the rag of a sail, the lively wind that drove them along, the
rushing ripple under their keel, all delighted him. He held the helm
with a sense of pleasure almost beyond anything he had ever known,
feeling all the exhilaration of a discoverer in a new country, and for
the first time the master of himself and his fate. Duncan said nothing,
but grinned from ear to ear, when the young master in his inattention
to, or to tell the truth ignorance of, the capabilities of the boat,
turned the helm sharply, bringing her up to the wind in such a way as to
threaten the most summary end for the voyage. He kept his eye upon the
rash steersman, and Walter was not aware of the risks he ran. He
directed his little vessel now here, now there, with absolute enjoyment,
running in close ashore to examine the village, turning about again in a
wild elation to visit an island, running the very nose of the boat into
the rocky banks or feathery bushwood. How it was that no harm came as
they thus darted from point to point Duncan never knew. He stood up
roused to watchfulness, with his eyes intent on the movements of his
master ready to remedy any indiscretion. It was in the nature of such
undeserved vigilance that the object of it was never aware of it, but to
be sure Duncan had his own life to think of too.

They had thus swept triumphantly down the loch, the wind favouring, and
apparently watching over the rash voyager as carefully, as and still
more disinterestedly than Duncan. The motion, the air, the restless
career, the novelty, and the freedom enchanted Walter. He felt like a
boy in his first escapade, with an intoxicating sense of independence
and scorn of danger which gave zest to the independence. At every new
zigzag he made, Duncan but grinned the more. He uttered the Gaelic name
of every point and isle, briefly, with guttural depth, out of his chest,
as they went careering along before the wind. The boat was like an
inquisitive visitor, too open for a spy, poking in to every corner. At
length they came to an island standing high out of the water, with a
rocky beach, upon which a boat lay carefully hauled up, and a feathery
crest of trees, fine clumps of fir, fringed and surrounded by a
luxuriant growth of lighter wood. In the midst of this fine network of
branches, such as we call bare, being leafless, but which in reality are
all astir with life restrained, brown purple buddings eager to start and
held in like hounds in a leash--rose the solid outline of a house, built
upon the ridge of rock, and appearing like a shadow in the midst of all
the anatomy of the trees.

"That will be joost the leddy's," cried Duncan; at which Walter's heart,
so light in his bosom, gave an additional leap of pleasure. He steered
it so close that Duncan's vigilance was doubly taxed, for the least
neglect would have sent the little vessel ashore. Walter examined the
little landing, the rocky path that led up the bank, winding among the
trees, and as much as could be made out of the house, with keen
interest. The man with the red shirt, who had been the young lady's
boatman on the previous day, appeared at the further point as they went
on. He was fishing from a rock that projected into the water, and
turning to gaze upon the unwary boat, with astonished eyes, shouted
something in Gaelic to Duncan, who nodded good-humouredly a great many
times, and replied with a laugh in the same tongue--

"Yon will joost be Hamish," said Duncan.

"What is he saying?" cried Walter.

"He will just be telling us to mind where we are going," said Duncan,
imperturbable.

"Tell him to mind his own business," cried Walter, with a laugh. "And
who is Hamish, and who is the leddy? Come, tell me all about it." His
interest in the voyage flagged a little at this point.

Duncan thus interrogated was more put to it than by the dangerous course
they had hitherto been running.

"It will joost be the leddy," he said; "and Hamish that's her man: and
they will joost be living up there like ither persons, and fearing God:
fery decent folk--oh, joost fery decent folk."

"I never doubted that. But who are they, and what are they? And do you
mean to say they _live_ there, on that rock, in winter, so far north?"

Walter looked up at the dazzling sky, and repented his insinuation: but
he was, alas, no better than an Englishman, when all was said, and he
could not help a slight shiver as he looked back. Hamish, who had made a
fine point of colour on his projecting rock, had gone from that point,
and was visible in his red shirt mounting the high crest of the island
with hurried appearances and disappearances as the broken nature of the
ground made necessary. He had gone, there seemed little doubt, to
intimate to the inhabitants the appearance of the stranger. This gave
Walter a new thrill of pleasure, but it took away his eagerness about
the scenery. He lay back languidly, neglecting the helm, and as he
distracted Duncan's attention too, they had nearly run aground on the
low beach of the next island. When this difficulty was got over, Walter
suddenly discovered that they had gone far enough, and might as well be
making their way homeward, which was more easily said than done; for the
wind, which had hitherto served their purpose nobly, was no longer their
friend. They made a tack or two, and crept along a little, but
afterwards resigned themselves to ship the sail and take to the oars,
which was not so exhilarating nor so well adapted to show the beauty of
the landscape. It took them some time to make their way once more past
the rocky point, and along the edge of the island which attracted
Walter's deepest interest, but to which he could not persuade Duncan to
give any name.

"It will joost be the leddy's," the boatman insisted on saying, with a
beaming face; but either his English or his knowledge was at fault, and
he went no further.

Walter's heart beat with a kind of happy anxiety, a keen but pleasant
suspense, as he swept his oar out of the water, and glanced behind him
to measure how near they were to the landing, at which he had a
presentiment something more interesting than Hamish might be seen. And
as it turned out, he had not deceived himself. But what he saw was not
what he expected to see.

The lady on the bank was not his fellow-traveller of yesterday. She was
what Walter to himself, with much disappointment, called an old lady,
wrapped in a large furred mantle and white fleecy wrap about her head
and shoulders. She stood and waved her hand as Walter's boat came slowly
within range.

"You will be joost the leddy," said Duncan of the few words; and with
one great sweep of his oar he turned the boat towards the landing. It
was the man's doing, not the master's; but the master was not sorry to
take advantage of this sudden guidance. It was all done in a moment,
without intention. Hamish stood ready to secure the boat, and before he
had time to think, Walter found himself on the little clearing above the
stony bit of beach, hat in hand, glowing with surprise and pleasure, and
receiving the warmest of welcomes.

"You will forgive me for just stopping you on your way," the lady said;
"but I was fain to see you, Lord Erradeen, for your father and I were
children together. I was Violet Montrose. You must have heard him speak
of me."

"I hope," said Walter, with his best bow, and most ingratiating tone,
"that you will not consider it any fault of mine; but I don't remember
my father; he died when I was a child."

"Dear me," cried the lady; "how could I be so foolish! Looking at you
again, I see you would not be old enough for that: and, now I remember,
he married late, and died soon after. Well, there is no harm done. We
are just country neighbours, and as I was great friends with Walter
Methven some five-and-forty years ago----"

"I hope," said the young man with a bow and smile, "that you will be so
good as to be friends with Walter Methven now: for that is the name
under which I know myself."

"Oh, Lord Erradeen," the lady said with a little flutter of pleasure.
Such a speech would be pretty from any young man; but made by a young
lord, in all the flush of his novel honours, and by far the greatest
potentate of the district, there was no one up the loch or down the loch
who would not have been gratified. "It is just possible," she said,
after a momentary pause, "that having been brought up in England, and
deprived of your father so early, you may not know much about your
neighbours, nor even who we are, in this bit island of ours. We are the
Forresters of Eaglescairn, whom no doubt ye have heard of; and I am one
of the last of the Montroses--alas! that I should say so. I have but one
of a large family left with me; and Oona and me, we have just taken
advantage of an old family relic that came from my side of the house,
and have taken up our habitation here. I hear she must have travelled
with you yesterday on the coach, not thinking who it was. Oh, yes; news
travels fast at this distance from the world. I think the wind blows it,
or the water carries it. All the loch by this time is aware of Lord
Erradeen's arrival. Indeed," she added, with a little laugh, "you know,
my lord, we all saw the light."

She was a woman over fifty, but fair and slight, with a willowy figure,
and a complexion of which many a younger woman might have been proud;
and there was a little airiness of gesture and tread about her, which
probably thirty years before had been the pretty affectations,
half-natural, half-artificial, of a beauty, and which still kept up the
tradition of fascinating powers. The little toss of her head, the
gesture of her hands, as she said the last words, the half-apologetic
laugh as if excusing herself for a semi-absurdity, were all
characteristic and amusing.

"You know," she added, "in the Highlands we are allowed to be
superstitious," and repeated the little laugh at herself with which she
deprecated offence.

"What is it supposed to mean?" Walter asked somewhat eagerly. "Of course
there is some natural explanation which will be simple enough. But I
prefer to take the old explanation, if I knew what it was."

"And so do we," she said quickly. "We are just ready to swear to it, man
and woman of us on the loch. Some say it is a sign the head of the house
is coming--some that it is a call to him to come and meet--Dear me,
there is Oona calling. And where is Hamish? I will not have the child
kept waiting," said the lady, looking round her with a little nervous
impatience.

She had begun to lead the way upward by a winding path among the rocks
and trees, and now paused, a little breathless, to look down towards the
landing-place, and clap her hands impatiently.

"Hamish is away, mem," said the woman whom Walter had seen on the coach,
and who now met them coming down the winding path. She looked at him
with a cordial smile, and air of kindly welcome. It was evident that it
did not occur to Mysie that her salutations might be inappropriate.
"You're very welcome, sir, to your ain country," she said with a
courtesy, which was polite rather than humble. Walter felt that she
would have offered him her hand, on the smallest encouragement, with a
kindly familiarity which conveyed no disrespect.

"You should say my lord, Mysie," her mistress remarked.

"Deed, mem, and so I should; but when you're no much in the way o't, ye
get confused. I said, as soon as I heard the news, that it would be the
young gentleman on the coach, and I had just a feeling a' the time that
it was nae tourist, but a kent face. Hamish is away, mem. I tell him he
hears Miss Oona's foot on the bank, before ever she cries upon him; and
yonder he is just touching the shore, and her ready to jump in."

The party had reached a little platform on the slope. The path was
skilfully engineered between two banks, clothed with ferns and grasses,
and still luxuriant with a vivid green, though the overhanging trees
were all bare. Here and there a little opening gave a point of repose
and extended view. Mrs. Forrester paused and turned round to point out
to her visitor the prospect that now lay before them. She was a little
breathless and glad of the pause, but it did not suit her character to
say so. She pointed round her with a little triumph. They were high
enough to see the loch on either side, looking down upon it through the
fringe of branches. Opposite to this was the mainland which at that spot
formed a little bay, thickly wooded with the dark green of the fir
woods, amid which appeared the gables of a sort of ornamental cottage.
Nearer the eye was the road, and underneath the road on the beach stood
a little slight figure in the closely-fitting garb which Walter
recognised. She had evidently been set down from a waggonette full of a
lively party which waited on the high road to see her embark. It was
impossible to hear what they were saying, but the air was full of a
pleasant murmur of voices.

"It is the young Campbells of Ellermore," said Mrs. Forrester, waving
her handkerchief towards the group. "Oona has been spending last night
with them, and they have brought her back. They will all be astonished,
Mysie, to see me standing here with a gentleman. Dear me, they will all
be saying who has Mrs. Forrester got with her?"

"They will think," said Mysie, "just that it's Mr. James or Mr. Ronald
come home."

"Ah, Mysie, if that could be!" said the lady of the isle: and she put
her hands together, which were thin and white, and ornamented by a
number of rings, with a pretty conventional gesture of maternal regret.
Walter stood looking on with mingled amazement and pleasure: pleased as
if he were at a play with all the new indications of domestic history
which were opening to him, and with a sense of enjoyment through all his
being. When the girl sprang into the boat, and Hamish, conspicuous in
his red shirt, pushed off into the loch, the tumult of good-byes became
almost articulate. He laughed to himself under his breath, remembering
all the greetings he had heard along the line of railway, the
recognitions at every station.

"Your daughter seems to know everybody," he said.

"And how could she help knowing every person," cried Mysie, taking the
words, as it were, out of her mistress's mouth, "when she was born and
brought up on the loch, and never one to turn her back upon a neebor,
gentle or simple, but just adored wherever she goes?"

"Oh, whisht, Mysie, whisht! we are partial," said Mrs. Forrester with
her little antiquated graces; and then she invited Lord Erradeen to
continue his walk.

It was the full blaze of day, and the view extended as they went higher
up to the crest of rock upon which the house was set. It was built of
irregular reddish stone, all cropped with lichens where it was visible,
but so covered with clinging plants that very little of the walls could
be seen. The rustic porch was built something like a bee-hive, with
young, slim-growing saplings for its pillars, and chairs placed within
its shelter. There were some flower-beds laid out around, in which a few
autumn crocuses had struggled into pale bloom--and a number of china
roses hung half opened against the sides of the house. The roofs were
partly blue slates, that most prosaic of comfortable coverings, and
partly the rough red tiles of the country, which shone warm through the
naked boughs.

    "Every hardy plant could bear
     Loch Katrine's keen and searching air,"

was garlanded about the house, the little lawn was as green as velvet,
the china roses were pale but sweet. Behind the house were the mossed
apple-trees of a primitive orchard among the rocky shelves. It lay
smiling in the sun, with the silver mirror of the lake all round, and
every tint and outline doubled in the water. From the door the dark old
castle of Kinloch Houran stood out against the silent darkness of the
hill. Little rocky islets, like a sport of nature, too small to be
inhabited by anything bigger than rabbits, lay all reflected in broken
lines of rock and brushwood, between Walter's old castle and this
romantic house. They were so visible, one to the other, that the mere
position seemed to form a link of connection between the inhabitants.

"We cannot but take an interest in you, you see, Lord Erradeen, for we
can never get out of sight of you," said Mrs. Forrester.

"And I think the old place looks better from here than any other view I
have seen," Walter added almost in the same breath.

They laughed as they spoke together. It was not possible to be more
entirely "country neighbours." The young man had a fantastic feeling
that it was a sort of flattery to himself that his house should be so
entirely the centre of the landscape. He followed the lady into the
house with a little reluctance, the scene was so enchanting. Inside, the
roofs were low, but the rooms well-sized and comfortable. They were full
of curiosities of every kind: weapons from distant countries, trophies
of what is called "the chase," hung upon the wall of the outer hall.
The drawing-room was full of articles from India and China, carved
ivories, monsters in porcelain, all the wonders that people used to send
home before we got Japanese shops at every corner. An air of gentle
refinement was everywhere, with something, too, in the many ornaments,
little luxuries, and daintinesses which suggested the little
_minauderies_ of the old beauty, the old-fashioned airs and graces that
had been irresistible to a previous generation.

"You will just stay and eat your luncheon with us, Lord Erradeen. I
might have been but poor company, an old woman as I'm getting; but, now
that Oona is coming, I need not be too modest; for, though there will
not be a grand luncheon, there will be company, which is always
something. And sit down and tell me something about your father and the
lady he married, and where you have been living all this time."

Walter laughed. "Is it all my humble history you want me to tell you?"
he said. "It is not very much. I don't remember my father, and the lady
he married is--my mother, you know. The best mother----But I have not
been the best of sons. I was an idle fellow, good-for-nothing a little
while ago. Nobody knew what was going to come of me. I did nothing but
loaf, if you know what that means."

"Ah, that I do," said Mrs. Forrester; "that was just like my Jamie. But
now they tell me he is the finest officer----"

Walter paused, but the lady was once more entirely attention, listening
with her hands clasped, and her head raised to his with an ingratiating
sidelong look. He laughed. "They all made up their minds I was to be
good-for-nothing----"

"Yes," murmured Mrs. Forrester, softly, half closing her eyes and
shaking her head, "that was just like my Bob--till he took a thought:
and now he is planting coffee in Ceylon and doing well. Yes? and then?"

"An old man arrived one evening," said Walter, half laughing, "and told
me--that I was Lord Erradeen. And do you know, from that moment nobody,
not even I myself, would believe that I had ever loafed or idled or been
good-for-nothing."

There was a pause, in which Walter thought he heard some one move behind
him. But no sound reached Mrs. Forrester, who responded eagerly--

"My son, the present Eaglescairn, was just of the same kind," she said,
reflectively. She had a comparison ready for every case that could be
suggested--"till he came of age. It was in the will that they were to
come of age only at twenty-five, and till then I had a sore time. Oh,
Oona, my dear, is that you? And had you a pleasant evening. Here is
young Lord Erradeen that has come in, most kindly, I'm sure, to tell me
about his father, that I knew so well. And it appears you met upon the
coach yesterday. Come away, my dear, come away! And that was just most
curious that, knowing nothing of one another, you should meet upon the
coach."

Oona came in lightly, in her out-door dress. She gave Walter a look
which was very friendly. She had paused for a moment at the door, and
she had heard his confession. It seemed to Oona that what he said was
generous and manly. She was used to forming quick impressions. She had
been annoyed when she had heard from Hamish of the visitor, but her mind
changed when she heard what he said. She came up to him and held out her
hand. The fresh air was in her face, which Walter thought was like the
morning, all bright and fresh and full of life. She made him a little
curtsey with much gravity, and said in the pretty voice which was so
fresh and sweet, and with that novelty of accent which had amused and
delighted the young man, "You are welcome to your own country Lord
Erradeen."

"Now that is very pretty of you, Oona," cried her mother. "I never
thought you would remember to pay your little compliment, as a well-bred
person should; for, to tell the truth, she is just too brusque--it is
her fault."

"Hamish told me what to say," said Oona, with a glance of provocation.
"He is a very well-bred person. He told me I was to bid my lord welcome
to his own."

"Oh, my dear, you need not take away the merit of it, as if you had not
thought of it yourself," said the mother, aggrieved; "but run away and
take off your hat, and let us have our lunch, for Lord Erradeen has been
all the morning on the water and he will be hungry, and you are all
blown about with the wind."

The young people exchanged looks, while Mrs. Forrester made her little
protest. There was a sort of laughing interchange between them, in which
she was mocking and he apologetic. Why, neither could have said. They
understood each other, though they by no means clearly understood each
what he and she meant. There was to be a little war between them, all in
good-humour and good-fellowship, not insipid agreement and politeness.
The next hour was, Walter thought, the most pleasant he had ever spent
in his life. He had not been ignorant of such enjoyments before. When we
said that various mothers in Sloebury had with the first news of his
elevation suffered a sudden pang of self-reproach, to think how they had
put a stop to certain passages, the end of which might now have been to
raise a daughter to the peerage, it must have been understood that
Walter was not altogether a novice in the society of women; but this had
a new flavour which was delightful to him. It had been pleasant enough
in the cottage, when Julia Herbert sang, and on other occasions not
necessary to enter into. But on this romantic isle, where the sound of
the loch upon the rocks made a soft accompaniment to everything, in a
retirement which no vulgar interruption could reach, with the faded
beauty on one side, scarcely able to forget the old pretty mannerisms
of conquest even in her real maternal kindness and frank Highland
hospitality, and the girl, with her laughing defiance on the other, he
felt himself to have entered a new chapter of history. The whole new
world into which he had come became visible to him in their
conversation. He heard how he himself had been looked for, and how "the
whole loch" had known something about him for years before he had ever
heard of Loch Houran. "We used to know you as the 'English lad,'" Oona
said, with her glance of mischief. All this amused Walter more than
words can say. The sun was dropping towards the west before--escorted to
the landing-place by both the ladies, and taken leave of as an old
friend--he joined the slow-spoken Duncan, and addressed himself to the
homeward voyage. Duncan had not been slow of speech in the congenial
company of Hamish. They had discussed the new-comer at length, with many
a shaft of humour and criticism, during the visit which Duncan had paid
to the kitchen. He blushed not now, secure in the stronghold of his
unknown tongue, to break off in a witty remark at Walter's expense as he
turned to his master his beaming smile of devotion. They set off
together, master and man, happy yet regretful, upon their homeward way.
And it was a tough row back to Kinloch Houran against the fresh and not
too quiet Highland wind.




CHAPTER XII.


The castle looked more grim and ruined than ever as Walter set foot once
more upon the rough grass of the mound behind. He dismissed the smiling
Duncan with regret. As he went up to the door, which now stood open, he
thought to himself with relief that another day would finish his
probation here, and that already it was more than half over; but next
moment remembered that the end of his stay at Kinloch Houran would mean
also an end of intercourse with his new friends, which gave a different
aspect to the matter altogether. At the door of the castle old
Macalister was waiting with a look of anxiety.

"Ye'll have had no luncheon," he said, "and here's Mr. Shaw the factor
waiting to see ye."

Macalister had not the manners of Symington, and Walter already felt
that it was a curious eccentricity on the part of the old man to leave
out his title. The factor was seated waiting in the room up-stairs; he
was a middle-aged man, with grizzled, reddish locks, the prototype in a
higher class of Duncan in the boat. He got up with a cordial
friendliness which Walter began to feel characteristic, but which was
also perhaps less respectful than might have been supposed appropriate,
to meet him. He had a great deal to say of business which to Walter was
still scarcely intelligible. There were leases to renew, and there was
some question about a number of crofter families, which seemed to have
been debated with the former lord, and to have formed the subject of
much discussion.

"There is that question about the crofters at the Truach-Glas," Mr. Shaw
said.

"What crofters? or rather what are crofters? and what is the question
and where is the Truach-Glas?" Lord Erradeen said.

He pronounced it, alas! Truack, as he still called loch, lock--which
made the sensitive natives shudder. Mr. Shaw looked at him with a little
disapproval. He felt that the English lad should have been more
impressed by his new inheritance, and more anxious to acquire a mastery
of all the facts connected with it. If, instead of wandering about the
loch all the morning, he had been looking up the details of the business
and the boundaries of the estate, and studying the map! But that not
being the case, of course there was nothing to be done but to explain.

"I had thought that Mr. Milnathort would have put the needs of the
estate more clearly before you. There are several questions to be
settled. I don't know what may be your views as to a landlord's duties,
Lord Erradeen----"

"I have no views," said Walter; "I am quite impartial. You must
recollect that I have only been a landlord for a fortnight."

"But I suppose," said the factor somewhat severely, "that the heir to
such a fine property has had some kind of a little training?"

"I have had no training--not the slightest. I had no information even
that I was the heir to any property. You must consider me as entirely
ignorant, but ready to learn."

Shaw looked at him with some surprise, but severely still. "It is very
curious," he said, as if that too had been Walter's fault, "that you did
not know you were the heir. We knew very well here; but the late lord
was like most people, not very keen about his successor; and then he was
a comparatively young man when he died."

"I know nothing of my predecessor," said Walter. "What was the cause of
his death? I should like to hear something about him. Several of them
must have died young, I suppose, or I, so far off, could never have
become the heir."

The factor looked at him keenly, but with doubtful eyes. "There are
secrets in all families, my Lord Erradeen," he said.

"Are there? I thought that was rather an old-fashioned sentiment. I
don't think, except that I was not always virtuously occupied, that
there was any secret in mine."

"And I am sure there is no secret in mine," said Mr. Shaw,
energetically; "but then you see I am not, and you were not till a very
recent date, Lord Erradeen. There is a kind of something in the race
that I will not characterise. It is a kind of a melancholy turn; the
vulgar rumours ye will have heard, to which I attach no credence. It is
little worth while living in the nineteenth century," the factor said
with emphasis, "if ye are to be subject to delusions like that."

"I tell you I am quite ignorant; and, except by hints which I could not
understand, Mr. Milnathort did not give me any information. Speak
plainly, I want to know what the mystery is; why am I here in this
tumble-down old place?" Walter cried with an accent of impatience.

Shaw kept a watchful eye upon him, with the air of a man whom another is
trying to deceive.

"It is something in the blood, I'm thinking," the factor said. "They all
seem to find out there's a kind of contrariety in life, which is a thing
we all must do to be sure, but generally without any fatal effects.
After a certain age they all seem to give way to it. I hope that _you_,
my lord, being out of the direct line, will escape: the populace--if ye
can accept their nonsense--say it's a--well, something supernatural--a
kind of an influence from him they call the Warlock Lord." Shaw laughed,
but somewhat uneasily, apologetically. "I think shame to dwell upon such
absurdity," he said.

"It does sound very absurd."

"That is just it--nonsense! not worth the consideration of sensible men.
And I may say to you, that are, I hope, of a more wholesome mind, that
they are terribly given up to caprice in this family. The Truach-Glas
crofters have been up and down twenty times. The late lord made up his
mind he would let them stay, and then that they must go, and again that
he would just leave them their bits of places, and then that he would
help them to emigrate; and after all, I had the order that they were to
be turned out, bag and baggage. I could not find it in my heart to do
it. I just put off, and put off, and here he is dead; and another," said
Shaw, with a suppressed tone of satisfaction, "come to the throne. And
you're a new man and a young man, and belong to your own century, not to
the middle ages," the factor cried with a little vehemence. Then he
stopped himself, with a "I beg your pardon, my lord; I am perhaps saying
more than I ought to say."

Walter made no reply. He was not sure that he did not think the factor
was going too far, for though he knew so little of his family, he
already felt that it was something not to be subjected to discussion by
common men. These animadversions touched his pride a little; but he was
silent, too proud to make any remark. He said, after a pause--

"I don't know that I can give my opinion without a further acquaintance
with the facts. If I were to do so on so slight a knowledge, I fear you
might think that a caprice too."

The factor looked at him with a still closer scrutiny, and took the
hint. There is nothing upon which it is so necessary to understand the
permitted limit of observation as in the discussion of family
peculiarities. Though he was so little responsible for this, and even so
little acquainted with them, it was impossible that Lord Erradeen should
not associate himself with his race. Mr. Shaw got out his papers, and
entered upon the questions in which the opinion of the new proprietor
was important, without a word further about the late lord and the family
characteristics. He explained to Walter at length the position of the
crofters, with their small holdings, who in bad seasons got into arrears
with their rents, and sometimes became a burden upon the landlord, in
whom, so far north, there was some admixture of a Highland chief. The
scheme of the estate altogether was of a mixed kind. There were some
large sheep farms and extensive moors still intermingled with glens more
populated than is usual in these regions. Some of them were on lands but
recently acquired, and the crofters in particular were a burden
transmitted by purchase, which the father of the last lord had made. It
was believed that there had been some covenant in the sale by which the
rights of the poor people were secured, but this had fallen into
forgetfulness, and there was no reason in law why Lord Erradeen should
not exercise all the rights of a proprietor and clear the glen, as so
many glens had been cleared. This was the first question that the new
lord would have to decide. The humble tenants were all under notice to
leave, and indeed were subject to eviction as soon as their landlord
pleased. It was with a kind of horror that Walter listened to this
account of his new possibilities.

"Eviction!" he said; "do you mean the sort of thing that happens in
Ireland?" He held his breath in unfeigned dismay and repugnance. "I
thought there was nothing of the sort here."

"Ireland is one thing, and Scotland another," said the factor. "We are a
law-abiding people. No man will ever be shot down behind a hedge by a
Highlander: so if you should resolve to turn them out to-morrow, my
lord, ye need stand in no personal fear."

Walter put aside this somewhat contemptuous assurance with a wave of his
hand.

"I have been told of a great many things I could do," he said, "in this
last fortnight; but I never knew before that I could turn out a whole
village full of people if I chose, and make their houses desolate."

It was a new view altogether of his new powers. He could not help
returning in thought to all the prepossessions of his former
middle-class existence, where arbitrary power was unknown, and where a
mild, general beneficence towards "the poor" was the rule. He said, half
to himself, "What would my mother say?" and in the novelty of the idea,
half laughed. What a thrill it would send through the district
visitors, the managers of the soup kitchen, all the charitable people!
There suddenly came up before him a recollection of many a conversation
he had heard, and taken no note of--of consultations how to pay the rent
of a poor family here and there, how to stop a cruel landlord's mouth.
And that he should appear in the character of a cruel landlord! No doubt
it would have been easy to show that the circumstances were quite
different. But in the mean time the son of Mrs. Methven could not throw
off the traditions in which he had been brought up. He contemplated the
whole matter from a point of view altogether different even from that of
Mr. Shaw, the factor. Shaw was prepared to prove that on the whole the
poor crofters were not such bad tenants, and that sheep farms and deer
forests, though more easily dealt with, had some disadvantages too; for
there was Paterson of Inverchory that had been nearly ruined by a bad
lambing season, and had lost the half of his flock; and as for the
shootings, was there not the dreadful example before them of the moors
at Finlarig, where everything had been shot down, and the game fairly
exterminated by a set of fellows that either did not know what they were
doing, or else were making money of it, and not pleasure. The very veins
in Shaw's forehead swelled when he spoke of this.

"I would like to have had the ducking of him," he cried; "a man with a
grand name and the soul of a henwife, that swept out the place as if he
had done it with a broom, and all for the London market; grant me
patience! You will say," added Shaw, "that the thing to do at Inverchory
is to get a man with more capital now that John Paterson's tack is done;
and that there's few sportsmen like Sir John. That's all very true; but
it just shows there are risks to be run in all ways, and the poor folk
at Truach-Glas would never lead you into losses like that."

Walter, however, did not pay much attention even to this view. His mind
had not room at the moment for Paterson of Inverchory, who was behind
with the rent, or Sir John, who had devastated the moors. He did not get
beyond the primitive natural horror of what seemed to him an outrage of
all natural laws and kindness. He had not been a landowner long enough
to feel the sacred right of property. He turn the cottagers out of their
poor little homes for the sake of a few pounds more or less of which he
stood in no need? The very arguments against taking this step made him
angry. Could anybody suppose he could do it? he, Walter Methven! As for
the Erradeen business, and all this new affair altogether--good heavens,
if anybody thought he would purchase it by that! In short, the young
man, who was not born a grand seigneur, boiled up in righteous wrath,
and felt it high scorn and shame that it could be supposed of him that
he was capable, being rich, of oppressing the poor--which was the way
in which he put it, in his limited middle-class conditions of thought.

Mr. Shaw was half-gratified, half-annoyed by the interview. He said to
the minister with whom he stopped to dine, and who was naturally much
interested about the new young man, that assuredly the young fellow had
a great deal of good in him, but he was a trifle narrow in his way of
looking at a question, "which is probably just his English breeding,"
the factor said. "I would have put the Crofter question before him in
all its bearings; but he was just out of himself at the idea of
eviction--like what happened in Ireland, he said. I could not get him to
go into the philosophy of it. He just would not hear a word. Nothing of
the kind had ever come his way before, one could see, and he was just
horrified at the thought."

"I don't call that leemited, I call it Christian," the minister said,
"and I am not surprised he should have a horror of it. I will go and see
him in the morning, if you think it will be well taken, for I'm with him
in that, heart and soul."

"Yes, yes, that's all in your way," said Mr. Shaw; "but I am surprised
at it in a young man. There is a kind of innocence about it. But I would
not wonder after a little if he should change his mind, as others have
done."

"Do you form any theory in your own thoughts, Shaw," said the minister,
"as to what it is that makes them so apt to change?"

"Not I," cried the factor, with a shrug of his shoulders; and then he
added hurriedly, "you've given me a capital dinner, and that whisky is
just excellent: but I think I must be going my ways, for already it's
later than I thought."

Mr. Cameron, who was minister of the parish, was, like Walter, a
stranger to the district and its ways. He was a great antiquary and full
of curiosity about all the relics of the past, and he had an enlightened
interest in its superstitions too. But Shaw was a Loch Houran man. He
had a reverence for the traditions which of course he vowed he did not
believe, and though he was very ready to make this statement in his own
person he did not like to hear outsiders, as he called the rest of the
world, discussing them disrespectfully? So he desired his dog-cart to be
"brought round," and drove home in the clear, cold night, warm at his
heart, good man, because of the good news for the Crofters, but a little
dissatisfied in his mind that the new lord should be doing this simply
as a matter of sentiment, and not from a reasonable view of the
situation. "Provided even that he keeps of that mind," the factor said
to himself.

Walter subsided out of his just indignation when the business part of
the interview ended, and he came out to the open air to see Mr. Shaw
away.

"This must all be put in order," he said, as he accompanied his visitor
to the boat.

Shaw looked at him with a little curiosity mingled with a slight air of
alarm.

"Auchnasheen being so near," he said, "which is a very comfortable
place, there has never been much notice taken of the old castle."

"But I mean to take a great deal of notice of it," the young man said
with a laugh. "I shall have some of the antiquaries down and clear out
all the old places."

His laugh seemed to himself to rouse the echoes, but it called forth no
responsive sound from his companion, and he caught a glimpse of old
Macalister in the distance shaking his old head. This amused yet
slightly irritated Walter, in the sense of power which alternated with a
sense of novelty and unreality in his mind.

"So you object to that?" he said to the old man. "You don't like your
privileges invaded?"

"It's no that," said Macalister; "but ye'll never do it. I've a lang,
lang acquaintance with the place, and I've witnessed many a revolution,
if I may say sae. One was to pull down the auld wa's altogether; another
was to clean it a' out like you. But it's never been done. And it'll
never be done. I'm just as sure o' that as your young lordship is that
you have a' the power in your hands."

Walter turned away with a little disdain in his laugh. It was not worth
while arguing out the matter with Macalister. Who should prevent him
from doing what he liked with his old house? He could not but reflect
upon the curious contradictions with which he was beset. He was supposed
to be quite capable of turning out a whole village out of their homes,
and making them homeless and destitute; but he was not supposed capable
of clearing out the blocked-up passage and rooms of an old ruin! He
smiled with a kind of scornful indignation as he went up to his
sitting-room. By this time the afternoon had lost all light and colour.
It was not dark, but neither was it day. A greyness had come into the
atmosphere; the shadows were black, and had lost all transparency. The
two windows made two bars of a more distinct greyness in the room, with
a deep line of shade in the centre between, which was coloured, but
scarcely lighted up, by the fire. He could not but think with a sense of
relief that the three days which were all he believed that were
necessary for his stay at Kinloch Houran were half over at least.
Another night and then he would be free to go. He did not mean to go any
further than to Auchnasheen, which was exactly opposite to the island;
and then, with a smile creeping about the corners of his mouth, he said
to himself, that he could very well amuse himself for a few days, what
with the shooting and what with----

And it would be comfortable to get out of this place, where the air, he
could not tell why, seemed always insufficient. The wainscot, the dark
hangings, the heavy old walls, seemed to absorb the atmosphere. He threw
up the window to get a little air, but somehow the projecting masonry
of the old walls outside seemed to intercept it. He felt an oppression
in his breast, a desire to draw long breaths, to get more air into his
lungs. It was the same sensation which he had felt last night, and he
did not contemplate with any pleasure the idea of another long evening
alone in so strange an atmosphere. However, he must make the best of it.
He went to the bookshelf and got down again his _Trois Mousquetaires_.
When the candles were lighted, he would write a dutiful long letter to
his mother, and tell her all that had been going on about him,
especially that barbarous suggestion about the cottagers.

"Fancy me in the character of a rapacious landlord, turning a whole
community out of doors!" he said to himself, concocting the imaginary
letter, and laughed aloud with a thrill of indignation.

Next moment he started violently, and turned round with a wild rush of
blood to his head, and that sort of rallying and huddling together of
all the forces of his mind which one feels in a sudden catastrophe. It
was, however, no loud alarm that had sounded. It was the clear and
distinct vibration of a voice close to him, replying calmly to his
thought.

"Is there anything special in you to disqualify you for doing a
disagreeable duty?" some one said.

Walter had started back at the first sound, his heart giving a bound in
him of surprise--perhaps of terror. He had meant to take that great
chair by the fire as soon as he had taken his book from the shelf, so
that it must (he said to himself in instantaneous self-argument) have
been vacant then. It was not vacant now. A gentleman sat there, with his
face half turned towards the light looking towards the young man; his
attitude was perfectly easy, his voice a well-bred and cultivated voice.
There seemed neither hurry nor excitement about him. He had not the air
of a person newly entered, but rather of one who had been seated there
for some time at his leisure, observing what was going on. He lifted his
hand with a sort of deprecating yet commanding gesture.

"There is no occasion," he said, in his measured voice, "for alarm. I
have no intention of harming you, or any one. Indeed I am not aware that
I have any power of harm."

Never in his life before had Walter's soul been swept by such violent
sensations. He had an impulse of flight and of deadly overwhelming
terror, and then of sickening shame at his own panic. Why should he be
afraid? He felt dimly that this moment was the crisis of his life, and
that if he fled or retreated he was lost. He stood his ground, grasping
the back of a chair to support himself.

"Who are you?" he said.

"That is a searching question," said the stranger, with a smile. "We
will come to it by and by. I should like to know in the first place what
there is in you which makes it impossible to act with justice in certain
circumstances?"

The air of absolute and calm superiority with which he put this question
was beyond description.

Walter felt like a criminal at the bar.

"Who are you?" he repeated hoarsely. He stood with a curious sense of
being supported only by the grasp which he had taken of the back of the
chair, feeling himself a mere bundle of impulses and sensations, hardly
able to keep himself from flight, hardly able to keep from falling down
at the feet of this intruder, but holding to a sort of self-restraint by
his grasp upon the chair. Naturally, however, his nerves steadied as the
moments passed. The first extreme shock of surprise wore away. There was
nothing to alarm the most timid in the countenance upon which he gazed.
It was that of a handsome man who had scarcely turned middle age, with
grey but not white hair very thin on the forehead and temples, a high
delicate aquiline nose, and colourless complexion. His mouth closed
somewhat sternly, but had a faint melting of a smile about it, by
movements which were ingratiating and almost sweet. The chief thing
remarkable about the stranger, however, besides the extraordinary
suddenness of his appearance, was the perfect composure with which he
sat, like a man who not only was the most important person wherever he
went, but also complete master of the present scene. It was the young
man who was the intruder, not he.

"I will tell you presently who I am," he said. "In the mean time
explain to me why you should be horrified at a step which better men
than yourself take every day. Sit down." The stranger allowed himself to
smile with distinct intention, and then said in a tone of which it is
impossible to describe the refined mockery, "You are afraid?"

Walter came to himself with another sensible shock: his pride, his
natural spirit, a certain impulse of self-defence which never forsakes a
man, came to his aid. He was inclined to say "No," with natural denial
of a contemptuous accusation; but rallying more and more every moment,
answered with something like defiance, "Yes--or rather I am not afraid.
I am startled. I want to know how you come here, and who you are who
question me--in my own house."

"You are very sure that it is your own house? You mean to have it
restored and made into a piece of sham antiquity--if nothing prevents?"

"What can prevent? if I say it is to be done," cried the young man. His
blood seemed to curdle in his veins when he heard the low laugh with
which alone the stranger replied. "May I ask you--to withdraw or to tell
me who you are?" he said. His voice trembled in spite of himself. The
words left his lips quite sturdily, but quivered when they got into the
air, or so in the fantastic hurry of his mind he thought.

"If I refuse, what then?" the stranger said.

These two individuals confronted each other, defying each other, one
angry and nervous, the other perfectly calm. In such circumstances only
one result is sure: that he who retains his self-possession will have
the mastery. Walter felt himself completely baffled. He could not turn
out with violence a dignified and serious visitor, who assumed indeed an
intolerable superiority, and had come in without asking leave, but yet
was evidently a person of importance--if nothing more. He stared at him
for a moment, gradually becoming familiarized with the circumstances.
"You are master of the situation," he said, with a hard-drawn breath. "I
suppose I can do nothing but submit. But if politeness on my part
requires this of me, it requires on yours some information. Your name,
your object?"

They looked at each other once more for a moment.

"When you put it in that way, I have nothing to say," said the stranger,
with great courtesy; "but to acknowledge your right to require--"

At that moment the door opened hurriedly, and Symington came in.

"Your lordship will be wanting something?" he said. "I heard your voice.
Was it to light the lights? or would it be for tea, or----"

He gave a sort of scared glance round the room, and clung to the handle
of the door, but his eyes did not seem to distinguish the new-comer in
the failing twilight.

"I did not call; but you may light the candles," Walter said, feeling
his own excitement, which had been subsiding, spring up again, in his
curiosity to see what Symington's sensations would be.

The old man came in reluctantly. He muttered something uneasily in his
throat. "I would have brought a light if I had known. You might have
cried down the stairs. It's just out of all order to light the lights
this gate," he muttered. But he did not disobey. He went round the room
lighting one after another of the twinkling candles in the sconces. Now
and then he gave a scared and tremulous look about him; but he took no
further notice. The stranger sat quite composedly, looking on with a
smile while this process was gone through. Then Symington came up to the
table in front of which Walter still stood.

"Take a seat, my lord, take a seat," he said. "It's no canny to see you
standing just glowering frae ye, as we say in the country. You look just
as if you were seeing something. And take you your French fallow that
you were reading last night. It's better when you're by yourself in an
auld house like this, that has an ill-name, always to do something to
occupy your thoughts."

Walter looked at the stranger, who made a little gesture of intelligence
with a nod and smile; and old Symington followed the look, still with
that scared expression on his face.

"Your lordship looks for all the world as if you were staring at
something in that big chair; you must be careful to take no fancies in
your head," the old servant said. He gave a little nervous laugh, and
retreated somewhat quickly towards the door. "And talk no more to
yourself; it's an ill habit," he added, with one more troubled glance
round him as he closed the door.




CHAPTER XIII.


"And so you have made acquaintance with the young lord--tell us what
kind of person he is, Mrs. Forrester--tell us what you think of him,
Oona."

This was the unanimous voice which rose from the party assembled on the
second day after Walter's visit in the drawing-room in the Isle.

It was by no means out of the world, though to all appearances so far
removed from its commotions. A low cottage-mansion on the crest of a
rock, in the middle of Loch Houran, six miles from the railway at the
nearest spot on which you could land, and with a mile or so of water,
often rough, between you and the post-office, is it possible to imagine
a more complete seclusion? and yet it was not a seclusion at all. Oona
cared very little for the roughness of the water between the Isle and
the post-office, and Hamish nothing at all, and news came as constantly
and as regularly to the two ladies on their island as to any
newspaper--news from all quarters of the world. The mail days were
almost as important to them--in one way far more important than to any
merchant in his office. Budgets came and went every week, and both Oona
and her mother would be busy till late at night, the little gleam of
their lighted windows shining over the dark loch, that no one might miss
his or her weekly letter. These letters went up into the hill countries
in India, far away to the borders of Cashmere, round the world to
Australia, dropt midway into the coffee groves of Ceylon. When one of
the boys was quartered in Canada, to which there is a mail three times a
week, _that_ looked like next parish, and they thought nothing of it.
Neither need it be supposed that this was the only enlivenment of their
lives. The loch, though to the tourist it looks silent enough, was in
fact fringed by a number of houses in which the liveliest existence was
going on. The big new house at the point, which had been built by a
wealthy man of Glasgow, with every possible splendour, threw the
homelier houses of the native gentry a little into the shade; but nobody
bore him any malice, his neighbours being all so well aware that their
own "position" was known and unassailable, that his finery and his
costliness gave them no pang. They were all a little particular about
their "position:" but then nobody on the loch could make any mistake
about that, or for a moment imagine that Mr. Williamson from Glasgow
could rival the Scotts of Inverhouran, the Campbells of Ellermore, of
Glentruan, and half a dozen names beside, or the Forresters of
Eaglescairn, or the old Montroses, who, in fact, were a branch of the
Macnabs, and held their house on the Isle from that important but
extinct clan. This was so clearly understood that there was not an
exception made to the Williamsons, who knew their place, and were very
nice, and made a joke of their money, which was their social standing
ground. They had called their house, which was as big as a castle, in
the most unobtrusive manner, Birkenbraes, thus proving at once that they
were new people and Lowlanders: so much better taste, everybody said,
than any pretence at Highland importance or name. And this being once
acknowledged, the gentry of the loch adopted the Williamsons cordially,
and there was not a word to be said. But all the Campbells about, and
those excellent Williamsons, and a few families who were not Campbells,
yet belonged to Loch Houran, kept a good deal of life "on the loch,"
which was a phrase that meant in the district generally. And the Isle
was not a dull habitation, whatever a stranger might think. There was
seldom a day when a boat or two was not to be seen, sometimes for hours
together, drawn up upon the rocky beach. And the number of persons
entertained by Mrs. Forrester at the early dinner which was politely
called luncheon would have appeared quite out of proportion with her
means by any one unacquainted with Highland ways. There was trout from
the loch, which cost nothing except Hamish's time, a commodity not too
valuable, and there was grouse during the season, which cost still less,
seeing it came from all the sportsmen about. And the scones, of every
variety known in Scotland, which is a wide word, were home-made. So
that hospitality reigned, and yet Mrs. Forrester, who was a skilled
housekeeper, and Mysie, to whom the family resources were as her own,
and its credit still more precious than her own, managed somehow to make
ends meet.

On this particular afternoon the drawing-room with all its slim sofas
and old-fashioned curiosities was full of Campbells, for young Colin of
Ellermore was at home for his holiday, and it was a matter of course
that his sisters and Tom, the youngest, who was at home reading (very
little) for his coming examination, should bring him to the Isle. Colin
was rather a finer gentleman than flourished by nature upon the loch. He
had little company ways which made his people laugh; but when he had
been long enough at home to forget these he was very nice they all said.
He was in London, and though in trade, in "tea," which is rather
aristocratic, he was in society too.

"What kind of person is he, Mrs. Forrester? Tell us what you think of
him, Oona," was what this youthful band said.

"Well, my dears," said Mrs. Forrester, "he is just a very nice young
man. I don't know how I can describe him better, for young men
now-a-days are very like one another. They all wear the same
clothes--not but what," she added graciously, "I would know Colin
anywhere for a London gentleman with his things all so well made: but
Lord Erradeen was just in a kind of tweed suit, and nothing remarkable.
And his hands in his pockets, like all of ye. But he answered very
nicely when I spoke to him, and said he was more used to Walter Methven
than to any other name, and that to be neighbourlike would just be his
pleasure. It is not possible to be more pleasant and well-spoken than
the young man was."

"Oh, but I want a little more," cried Marjorie Campbell; "that tells
nothing; is he fair, or is he dark? is he tall or is he little--is he--"

"He couldn't be little," cried Janet, indignantly, "or he would not be a
hero: and I've made up my mind he's to be a hero. He'll have to do
something grand, but I don't know what: and to spoil it all with making
him small--"

"Heroes are all short," said Tom, "and all the great generals. You don't
want weedy, long-legged fellows like Colin and the rest of them. But you
know they all run to legs in our family, all but me."

"All this is irrelevant," said Colin with a smile which was somewhat
superior, "and you prevent Mrs. Forrester from giving us the masterly
characterisation which I know is on her lips."

"You are just a flatterer," said that simple lady, shaking her finger at
him; "there was no character coming from my lips. He is just a fine
simple-hearted young man. It appears he never knew what he was heir to,
and has no understanding even now, so far as I could learn, about the
Erradeens. He told me he had been a thoughtless lad, and, as well as I
could judge just a handful to his poor mother; but that all that was
over and gone."

"You are going too far, mamma," said Oona. "He said he had 'loafed.'
Loafing means no harm, does it, Colin? It means mere idleness, and no
more."

"Why should you think I am an authority on the subject?" said Colin. "I
never loaf: I go to the City every day. When I come back I have to keep
up society, so far as I can, and hunt about for invitations, otherwise I
should never be asked out. That is not loafing, it is hard work."

"Ask me, Oona," said young Tom; "I can tell you. It is the nicest thing
in the world. It means just doing nothing you are wanted to do, taking
your own way, watching nature, don't you know, and studying men, and
that sort of thing, which all the literary people say is better than
cramming. But only it does not pay in an exam."

"Oh, hold your tongue, Tommy," cried his sister. "You will fail again,
you know you will, and papa will be in despair. For you are not like
Colin, who is clever; you are good for nothing but soldiering, and next
year you will be too old."

"It's a shame," cried Tom hotly, "to make a fellow's commission depend
upon his spelling. What has spelling to do with it? But I'm going into
the militia, and then I shall be all right."

"And did Erradeen," said Colin to Mrs. Forrester, "let out any of the
secrets of his prison-house?"

"Bless me, he looked just as cheerful as yourself or even as Tom. There
was nothing miserable about him," Mrs. Forrester replied. "He had been
all the morning enjoying himself on the loch, and he came up and ate his
lunch just very hearty, and as happy as possible, with Oona and me. He
was just very like my own Ronald or Rob: indeed I think there's
something in his complexion and his way of holding himself that is very
like Rob; and took my opinion about the old castle, and what was the
meaning of the light on the tower. Indeed," added Mrs. Forrester with a
laugh, "I don't know if it is anything in me that draws people to tell
me their stories, but it is a very general thing, especially for young
persons, to ask for my advice."

"Because you're so kind," said Janet Campbell, who was romantic and
admired the old beauty.

"Because you're so clever," said Marjorie, who had a turn for satire.

Oona, whose ear was very quick for any supposed or possible ridicule,
such as her mother's little foibles occasionally laid her open to,
turned quickly round from Tom, leaving him speaking, and with a little
heightened colour interposed.

"We are opposite to the castle night and day," she said. "We cannot go
out to the door or gather a flower without seeing it; and at night there
it is in the moonlight. So naturally we are better acquainted with what
happens than anybody else can be."

"And do you really, really believe in the light?" said Marjorie.

Ellermore lay quite at the other end of the great loch, among another
range of hills, and was shut out from personal acquaintance with the
phenomena of Kinloch Houran. Colin gave a slight laugh, the faintest
possible indication of incredulity, to repeat with an increase of force
the doubt in his sister's tone. Oona was not without a healthful little
temper, which showed in the flash of her eye and the reddening of her
cheek. But she answered very steadily, with much suppressed feeling in
her tone--

"What do you call believing?" she said. "You believe in things you
cannot see? then I don't believe in the Kinloch Houran light. Because I
see it, and have seen it a hundred times as clear as day."

At this there was a little pause among the party of visitors, that pause
of half-amused superiority and scepticism, with which all believers in
the mysterious are acquainted. And then Marjorie, who was the boldest,
replied--

"Papa says it is a sort of phosphorescence, which is quite explainable:
and that where there is so much decaying matter, and so much damp, and
so much----"

"Faith, perhaps," said Colin, with that slight laugh; "but we are
outsiders, and we have no right to interfere with the doctrines of the
loch. Oona, give us that credit that we are outside the circle, and you
must not send us to the stake."

"Oh, my dears," said Mrs. Forrester, "and that is quite true. I have
heard very clever men say that there was nothing made so much difference
in what you believed as just the place you were born in, and that people
would go the stake, as you say, on one side of the border for a thing
they just laughed at on the other."

This, which was a very profound deliverance for Mrs. Forrester, she
carried off at the end with a pretty profession of her own disabilities.

"I never trust to my own judgment," she said. "But Oona is just very
decided on the subject, and so are all our people on the isle, and I
never put myself forward one way or another. Are you sure you will not
take a cup of tea before you go? a cup of tea is never out of place. It
is true that the day is very short, and Colin, after his town life, will
be out of the way of rowing. You are just going across by the ferry, and
then driving? Well, that is perhaps the best way. And in that case there
is plenty of time for a cup of tea. Just ring the bell, or perhaps it
will be safer, Oona, if you will cry upon Mysie and tell her to lose no
time. Just the tea, and a few of the cream scones, and a little cake.
She need not spread the table as there is so little time."

The interlude of the tea and the cream scones made it late before the
visitors got away. Their waggonette was visible waiting for them on the
road below Auchnasheen, and five minutes were enough to get them
across, so that they dallied over this refreshment with little thought
of the waning afternoon. Then there was a little bustle to escort them
down to the beach, to see them carefully wrapped up, to persuade
Marjorie that another "hap" would be desirable, and Janet that her
"cloud" should be twisted once more about her throat. The sunset was
waning when at last they were fairly off, and the loch lay in a still,
yellow radiance, against which every tree and twig, every rock and
stone, stood out dark in full significance of outline. It was cold, and
Mrs. Forrester shivered in her furred cloak.

"The shore looks so near that you could touch it," she said; "there will
be rain to-morrow, Oona."

"What does it matter about to-morrow?" cried the girl; "it's beautiful
to-night. Go in, mamma, to the fireside; but I will stay here and see
them drive away."

The mother consented to this arrangement, which was so natural; but a
moment afterwards came back and called from the porch, where she stood
sheltered from the keen and eager air.

"Oona! Come in, my dear. That Colin one, with his London ways, will
think you are watching him."

There was something sublime in the fling of Oona's head, and the
erection of her slim figure, as she rejected the possibility.

"Watching _him_!" She was too proud even to permit herself to resent it.

"Ah! but you never can tell what a silly lad may take into his head,"
said Mrs. Forrester; and, having thus cleared her conscience, she went
in and took off her cloak, and shut the drawing-room door, and made
herself very comfortable in her own cosy chair in the ruddy firelight.
She laid her head back upon the soft cushions and looked round her with
a quiet sense of content. Everything was so comfortable, so pretty and
homelike; and by-and-by she permitted herself, for ten minutes or so, to
fall into a soft oblivion. "I just closed my eyes," was Mrs. Forrester's
little euphemism to herself.

Meanwhile Oona stood and looked at sky and sea and shore. The soft plash
of the oars came through the great stillness, and, by-and-by, there was
the sound of the boat run up upon the shingle, and the noise of the
disembarkation, the voices swelling out in louder tones and laughter. As
they waved their hands in a final good-night to the watcher on the isle
before they drove away, the young people, as Mrs. Forrester had said,
laughed and assured Colin that it was not for them Oona stood out in the
evening chill. But, as a matter of fact, there was nothing so little in
Oona's mind. She was looking round her with that sort of exaltation
which great loneliness and stillness and natural beauty so naturally
give: the water gleaming all round, the sky losing its orange glow and
melting into soft primrose tints the colour of the daffodil.

    "The holy time is quiet as a nun
        Breathless with adoration."

All the sensations that belong to such a moment are exquisite; a
visionary elevation above the earth and all things earthly, a soft
pensiveness, an elation, yet wistful longing of the soul. Before her the
old castle of Kinloch Houran lay gloomy and dark on the edge of the
water. If she thought of anything it was of the young neighbour, to whom
she felt so strangely near in wonder and sympathy. Who might be with him
at that moment in the ghostly quiet? What thoughts, what suggestions,
were being placed before him? Oona put her hands together, and breathed
into the still air a wish of wondering and wistful pity which was almost
a prayer. And then, rousing herself with a slight shiver and shake, she
turned and went in, shutting out behind her the lingering glory of the
water and sky.

Mysie was lighting the candles when she went in, and Mrs. Forrester had
opened her eyes. Two candles on the mantelpiece and two on the table
were all the ladies allowed themselves, except on great occasions, when
the argand lamp, which was the pride of the household, was lighted in
honour of a visitor. The warmth of this genial interior was very welcome
after the cold of the twilight, and Oona brought her work to the table,
and the book from which her mother was in the habit of reading aloud.
Mrs. Forrester thought she improved her daughter's mind by these
readings; but, to tell the truth, Oona's young soul, with all the world
and life yet before it, often fled far enough away while her mother's
soft voice, with the pretty tricks of elocution, which were part of her
old-fashioned training, went on. Never was there a prettier indoor
scene. In the midst of that great solitude of woods and water, the
genial comfort of this feminine room, so warm, so softly lighted, so
peaceful and serene, struck the imagination like a miracle. Such a
tranquil retirement would have been natural enough safely planted amid
the safeguards and peaceful surroundings of a village: but in being here
there was a touching incongruity. The little play of the mother's voice
as she read with innocent artifice and the simple vanity which belonged
to her, the pretty work, of no great use, with which the girl was busy,
both heightened the sense of absolute trust with which they lived in the
bosom of nature. A sudden storm, one could not but think, might have
swept them away into the dark gleaming water that hemmed them round.
They were not afraid: they were as safe as in a citadel. They were like
the birds in their nests; warm and soft, though in the heart of Loch
Houran. Mrs. Forrester was reading a historical novel, one of the kind
which she thought so good for improving Oona's mind; amusing, yet
instructing her. But Oona's mind, refusing to be improved, was giving
only a mechanical attention. It was away making a little pilgrimage of
wonder about the mystic house which was so near them, longing to know,
and trying to divine, what was going on there.

But when the afternoon closes in at four o'clock, and the candles are
lighted shortly after, the night is long. It seemed endless on this
occasion, because of the too early tea, which Mrs. Forrester had thought
it would be "just a farce" to produce again at six o'clock, their usual
hour; and from half-past four till nine, when the small and light repast
known in the house under the pleasantly indefinite name of "the tray"
made its appearance, is a long time. There had been two or three
interruptions of a little talk, and the book had been laid down and
resumed again, and Oona's work had dropped two or three times upon her
knee, when Mysie, coming in, announced that it was just an uncommon fine
night, though all the signs (including the glass, which, however, does
not always count in the west of Scotland) pointed to rain, and that
Hamish was going to take advantage of the moonlight to do an errand at
the village above Auchnasheen. Would Miss Oona like to go? It was just
awfu' bonny, and with plenty of haps she could take no harm, Mysie said.
To see how the girl sprang from her seat was a proof of the gentle
tedium that had stolen upon her soul.

"But, my dear, it will be cold, cold. I am afraid of you catching cold,
Oona," Mrs. Forrester cried.

"Oh, mother, no. I never catch cold; and besides, if I did, what would
it matter? Tell him I'm coming, Mysie; tell him to wait for me. I'll put
on my thick ulster, or the fur cloak, if you like."

"Certainly, the fur cloak, Oona. I will not hear of it without that.
But, my dear, just think, Hamish will have to leave you in the boat
while he goes to the village; and what would you do, Oona, if there is
any one on the road?"

"Do, mamma? Look at them, to see if I knew them. And, if it was a
stranger, just sit still and say nothing."

"But, my dear! It might be somebody that would speak to you, and--annoy
you, Oona."

"There is no person up the loch or down the loch that would dare to do
that, mem," said Mysie, composedly.

"How can we tell? It might be some tourist or gangrel body."

"Annoy _me_!" said Oona, as if indeed this suggestion was too
far-fetched for possibility. "If anything so ridiculous happened I would
just push out into the loch. Don't you trouble, mother, about me."

Mrs. Forrester got up to envelop her child's throat in fold after fold
of the fleecy white "cloud." She shook her head a little, but she was
resigned, for such little controversies occurred almost daily. The
evening had changed when Oona ran lightly down the bank to the boat in
which Hamish was waiting. Everything about was flooded with the keen,
clear white moonlight, which in its penetrating chilly fashion was
almost more light than day. The loch was shining like silver, but with a
blackness behind the shining, and all the shadows were like midnight
profound in inky gloom. The boat seemed to hang suspended in the keen
atmosphere rather than to float, and the silence was shrill, and seemed
to cut into the soul. It was but a few minutes across the cold white
glittering strait that lay between the isle and the mainland. Hamish
jumped out with an exaggerated noise upon the slippery shingle, and
fastened the boat with a rattle of the ring to which it was attached,
which woke echoes all around both from land and water, everything under
the mingled influence of winter and night being so still. A chance
spectator would have thought that the mother had very good cause for her
alarm, and that to sit there in the rough boat absolutely alone, like
the one living atom in a world all voiceless and asleep, was not a
cheerful amusement for a girl. But Oona had neither fear nor sense of
strangeness in an experience which she had gone through so often. She
called out lightly to Hamish to make haste, and looked after him as he
set out on the white road, the peculiarities of his thick-set figure
coming out drolly in the curious dab of foreshortened shadow flung upon
the road by his side. She laughed at this to herself, and the laugh ran
all about with a wonderful cheerful thrill of the silence. How still it
was! When her laugh ceased, there was nothing but the steps of Hamish in
all the world--and by and by even the steps ceased, and that stillness
which could be felt settled down. There was not a breath astir, not
enough to cause the faintest ripple on the beach. Now and then a pebble
which had been pushed out of its place by the man's foot toppled over,
and made a sound as if something great had fallen. Otherwise not a
breath was stirring; the shadows of the fir-trees looked as if they
were gummed upon the road. And Oona held her breath; it seemed almost
profane to disturb the intense and perfect quiet. She knew every hue of
every rock, and the profile of every tree. And presently, which no doubt
was partly because of this perfect acquaintance, and partly because of
some mesmeric consciousness in the air, such as almost invariably
betrays the presence of a human being, her eyes fixed upon one spot
where the rock seemed higher than she had been used to. Was it possible
that somebody was there? She changed her place to look more closely; and
so fearless was the girl that she had nearly jumped out of the boat to
satisfy herself whether it was a man or a rock. But just when she was
about making up her mind to do so, the figure moved, and came down
towards the beach. Oona's heart gave a jump; several well-authenticated
stories which she had heard from her childhood came into her mind with a
rush. She took the end of the rope softly in her hand so as to be able
to detach it in a moment. To row back to the isle was easy enough.

"Is it you, Miss Forrester?" a voice said.

Oona let go the rope, and her heart beat more calmly. "I might with more
reason cry out, Is it you, Lord Erradeen? for if you are at the old
castle you are a long way from home, and I am quite near."

"I am at Auchnasheen," he said. A great change had come over his tone;
it was very grave; no longer the airy voice of youth which had jested
and laughed on the Isle. He came down and stood with his hand on the
bow of the boat. He looked very pale, very serious, but that might be
only the blackness of the shadows and the whiteness of the light.

"Did you ever see so spiritual a night?" said Oona. "There might be
anything abroad; not fairies, who belong to summer, but serious things."

"Do you believe then in--ghosts?" he said.

"Ghosts is an injurious phrase. Why should we call the poor people so
who are only--dead?" said Oona. "But that is a false way of speaking
too, isn't it? for it is not because they are dead, but living, that
they come back."

"I am no judge," he said, with a little shiver. "I never have thought on
the subject. I suppose superstition lingers longer up among the
mountains."

"Superstition!" said Oona, with a laugh. "What ugly words you use!"

Once more the laugh seemed to ripple about, and break the solemnity of
the night. But young Lord Erradeen was as solemn as the night, and his
countenance was not touched even by a responsive smile. His gravity
produced upon the girl's mind that feeling of visionary panic and
distrust which had not been roused by the external circumstances. She
felt herself grow solemn too, but struggled against it.

"Hamish has gone up with some mysterious communication to the
game-keeper," she said; "and in these long nights one is glad of a
little change. I came out with him to keep myself from going to sleep."

Which was not perhaps exactly true: but there had arisen a little
embarrassment in her mind, and she wanted something to say.

"And I came out--" he said; then paused. "The night is not so ghostly as
the day," he added, hurriedly; "nor dead people so alarming as the
living."

"You mean that you disapprove of our superstitions, as you call them,"
said Oona. "Most people laugh and believe a little; but I know some are
angry and think it wrong."

"I----angry! That was not what I meant. I meant----It is a strange
question which is living and which is----To be sure, you are right, Miss
Forrester. What is dead cannot come in contact with us, only what is
living. It is a mystery altogether."

"You are not a sceptic then?" said Oona. "I am glad of that."

"I am not----anything. I don't know how to form an opinion. How lovely
it is, to be sure," he burst out all at once; "especially to have some
one to talk to. That is the great charm."

"If that is all," said Oona, trying to speak cheerfully, "you will soon
have dozens of people to talk to, for everybody in the county--and that
is a wide word--is coming to call. They will arrive in shoals as soon as
they know."

"I think I shall go--in a day or two," he said.

At this moment the step of Hamish, heard far off through the great
stillness, interrupted the conversation. It had been as if they two were
alone in this silent world; and the far-off step brought in a third and
disturbed them. They were silent, listening as it came nearer and
nearer, the sound growing with every repetition. When Hamish appeared in
the broad white band of road coming from between the shadows of the
trees the young man dropped his hand from the bow of the boat. He had
not spoken again, nor did Oona feel herself disposed to speak. Hamish
quickened his pace when he saw another figure on the beach.

"Ye'll no' have been crying upon me, Miss Oona," he said, with a
suspicious look at the stranger.

"Oh no, Hamish!" cried Oona, cheerfully. "I have not been wearying at
all, for this is Lord Erradeen that has been so kind as to come and keep
me company."

"Oh, it'll be my Lord Erradeen?" said Hamish, with a curious look into
Walter's face.

Then there was a repetition of the noises with which the still loch
rang, the rattle of the iron ring, the grating of the bow on the shingle
as she was pushed off. Hamish left no time for leave-taking. There were
a few yards of clear water between the boat and the beach when Oona
waved her hand to the still figure left behind. "My mother will like to
see you to-morrow," she cried, with an impulse of sympathy. "Good
night."

He took his hat off, and waved his hand in reply, but said nothing, and
stood motionless till they lost sight of him round the corner of the
isle. Then Hamish, who had been exerting himself more than usual, paused
a little.

"Miss Oona," he said, "yon will maybe be the young lord, but maybe no. I
would not be speaking to the first that comes upon the loch side----"

"Oh, if you are beginning to preach propriety----" the girl cried.

"It'll not be propriety, it will just be that they're a family that is
not canny. Who will tell you if it's one or if it's the other? Did ye
never hear the tale of the leddy that fell off the castle wall?"

"But this is not the castle," cried Oona, "and I know him very well--and
I'm sorry for him, Hamish. He looks so changed."

"Oh, what would you do being sorry for him? He has nothing ado with
us--nothing ado with us," Hamish said.

And how strange it was to come in again from that brilliant whiteness
and silence--the ghostly loch, the visionary night--into the ruddy room
full of firelight and warmth, all shut in, sheltered, full of
companionship.

"Come away, come away to the fire; you must be nearly frozen, Oona, and
I fear ye have caught your death of cold," her mother said.

Oona remembered with a pang the solitary figure on the water's edge, and
wondered if he were still standing there forlorn. A whole chapter of
life seemed to have interposed between her going and coming, though she
had been but half an hour away.




CHAPTER XIV.


Two days after this night scene there was a gathering such as was of
weekly occurrence in the Manse of Loch Houran parish. The houses were
far apart, and those of the gentry who were old-fashioned enough to
remain for the second service, were in the habit of spending the short
interval between in the minister's house, where an abundant meal, called
by his housekeeper a cold collation, was spread in the dining-room for
whosoever chose to partake. As it was the fashion in the country to dine
early on Sunday, this repast was but sparingly partaken of, and most of
the company, after the glass of wine or milk, the sandwich or biscuit,
which was all they cared to take, would sit round the fire in the
minister's library, or examine his books, or, what was still more
prized, talk to him of their own or their neighbours' affairs. The
minister of Loch Houran was one of those celibates who are always
powerful ecclesiastically, though the modern mind is so strongly opposed
to any artificial manufacture of them such as that which the Church of
Rome in her wisdom has thought expedient. We all know the arguments in
favour of a married clergy, but those on the other side of the question
it is the fashion to ignore. He who has kept this natural distinction by
fair means, and without compulsion, has however an unforced advantage of
his own which the most Protestant and the most matrimonial of polemics
will scarcely deny. He is more safe to confide in, being one, not two.
He is more detached and individual; it is more natural that all the
world about him should have a closer claim upon the man who has no
nearer claims to rival those of his spiritual children. Mr. Cameron was
one of this natural priesthood. If he had come to his present calm by
reason of passion and disappointment in his past, such as we obstinately
and romantically hope to have founded the tranquillity of subdued,
sunny, and sober age, nobody could tell. An old minister may perhaps be
let off more easily in this respect than an old monk; but he was the
friend and consoler of everybody; the depositary of all the secrets of
the parish; the one adviser of whose disinterestedness and secrecy every
perplexed individual was sure. He did all that man could do to be
absolutely impartial and divide himself, as he divided his provisions,
among his guests as their needs required. But flesh is weak, and Mr.
Cameron could not disown one soft place in his heart for Oona Forrester,
of which that young person was quite aware. Oona was his pupil and his
favourite, and he was, if not her spiritual director, which is a
position officially unknown to his Church, at least her confidant in all
her little difficulties, which comes to much the same thing: and this
notwithstanding the fact that Mrs. Forrester attended the parish church
under protest, and prided herself on belonging to the Scottish Episcopal
community, the Church of the gentry, though debarred by providence from
her privileges. Mrs. Forrester at this moment, with her feet on the
fender, was employed in bewailing this sad circumstance with another
landed lady in the same position; but Oona was standing by the old
ministers side, with her hand laid lightly within his arm, which was a
pretty way she had when she was with her oldest friend. It did not
interfere with this attitude, that he was exchanging various remarks
with other people, and scarcely talking to Oona at all. He looked down
upon her from time to time with a sort of proud tenderness, as her
grandfather might have done. It pleased the old man to feel the girl's
slim small fingers upon his arm. And as there were no secrets discussed
in this weekly assembly her presence interrupted nothing. She added her
word from time to time, or the still readier comment of smiles and
varying looks that changed like the Highland sky outside, and were never
for two minutes the same. It was not, however, till Mr. Shaw, the
factor, came in, that the easy superficial interest of all the parish
talk quickened into something more eager and warm in her sympathetic
countenance. Shaw's ruddy face was full of care; this was indeed its
usual expression, an expression all the more marked from the blunt and
open simplicity of its natural mood to which care seemed alien. The
puckers about his hazel grey eyes, the lines on his forehead which
exposure to the air had reddened rather than browned, were more than
usually evident. Those honest eyes seemed to be remonstrating with the
world and fate. They had an appearance half-comic to the spectator, but
by no means comic to their own consciousness of grieved interrogation as
if asking every one on whom they turned, "Why did you do it?" "Why did
you let it be done?" It was this look which he fixed upon the minister,
who indeed was most innocent of all share in the cause of his trouble.

"I told you," he said, "the other day, about the good intentions of our
young lord. I left various things with him to be settled that would bide
no delay--things that had been waiting for the late Lord Erradeen from
day to day. And all this putting off has been bad, bad. There's those
poor crofters that will have to be put out of their bits of places
to-morrow. I can hold off no longer without his lordship's warrant. And
not a word from him--not a word!" cried the good man, with that
appealing look, to which the natural reply was, It is not my fault. But
the minister knew better, and returned a look of sympathy, shaking his
white head.

"What has become of the young man? they tell me he has left the castle."

"He is not far off--he is at Auchnasheen; but he is just like all the
rest, full of goodwill one day, and just inaccessible the next--just
inaccessible!" repeated the factor. "And what am I to do? I am just wild
to have advice from somebody. What am I to do?"

"Can you not get at him to speak to him?" the minister asked.

"I have written to know if he will see me. I have said I was waiting an
answer, but there's no answer comes. They say he's on the hill all day,
though the keepers know nothing about his movements, and he does not
even carry a gun. What am I to do? He sees nobody; two or three have
called, but cannot get at him. He's always out--he's never there. That
old Symington goes about wringing his hands. What says he? he says,
'This is the worst of a'; this is the worst of a'. He's just got it on
him----'"

"What does that mean?"

"Can I tell what that means? According to the old wives it is the weird
of the Methvens; but you don't believe such rubbish, nor do I. It has,
maybe, something to do with the drainage, or the water, or the sanitary
arrangements, one way or the other!" cried the factor with a harsh and
angry laugh.

Then there was a momentary pause, and the hum of the other people's talk
came in, filling up with easier tones of conversation the somewhat
strained feeling of this: "He's a good shot and a fine oar, and just a
deevil for spunk and courage: and yet because he's a little vague in his
speaking!" "But, I say, we must put up with what we can get, and though
it's a trial the surplice is not just salvation." "And it turned out to
be measles, and not fever at all, and nothing to speak of; so we just
cheated the doctors." These were the broken scraps that came in to fill
up the pause.

"I saw Lord Erradeen the other night," said Oona, whose light grasp on
the old minister's arm had been tightening and slackening all through
this dialogue, in the interest she felt. Both of the gentlemen turned to
look at her inquiringly, and the girl blushed--not for any reason, as
she explained to herself indignantly afterwards, but because it was a
foolish way she had; but somehow the idea suggested to all their minds
was not without an effect upon the events of her after-life.

"And what did he say to you? and what is he intending? and why does he
shut himself up and let all the business hang suspended like yon fellow
Machomet's coffin?" cried the factor, with a guttural in the prophet's
name which was due to the energy of his feelings. He turned upon Oona
those remonstrating eyes of his, as if he had at last come to the final
cause of all the confusion, and meant to demand of her, without any
quibbling, an answer to the question, Why did you do it? on the spot.

"Indeed, he said very little to me, Mr. Shaw. He looked like a ghost,
and he said--he was going away in a day or two."

Sudden reflection in the midst of what she was saying made it apparent
to Oona that it was unnecessary to give all the details of the
interview. Mr. Cameron, for his part, laid his large, soft old hand
tenderly upon hers which was on his arm, and said, in the voice which
always softened when he addressed her--

"And where would that be, my bonnie Oona, that you met with Lord
Erradeen?"

"It was on the beach below Auchnasheen," said Oona, with an almost
indignant frankness, holding her head high, but feeling, to her anger
and distress, the blush burn upon her cheek. "Hamish had some errand on
shore, and I went with him in the boat. I was waiting for him, when some
one came down from the road and spoke to me. I was half-frightened, for
I did not know any one was there. It was Lord Erradeen."

"And what?--and why?--and--"

The factor was too much disturbed to form his questions reasonably, even
putting aside the evident fact that Oona had no answer to give him. But
at this moment the little cracked bell began to sound, which was the
warning that the hour of afternoon service approached. The ladies rose
from their seats round the fire, the little knots of men broke up.
"Oona, my dear, will ye come and tie my bonnet? I never was clever at
making a bow," said Mrs. Forrester; and the minister left his guests to
make his preparations for church. Mr. Shaw felt himself left in the
lurch. He kept hovering about Oona with a quick decision in his own
mind, which was totally unjustified by any foundation; he went summarily
through a whole romance, and came to its conclusion in the most
matter-of-fact and expeditious way. "If that comes to pass now!" he said
to himself. "_She's_ no Me'ven; there's no weird on her; he can give her
the management of the estates, and all will go well. She has a head upon
her shoulders, though she is nothing but a bit girlie--and there will be
me to make everything plain!" Such was the brief epitome of the
situation that passed in the factor's mind. He was very anxious to get
speech of Oona on the way to church, and it is to be feared that Mr.
Cameron's excellent afternoon discourse (which many people said was
always his best, though as it was listened to but drowsily the fact may
be doubted) made little impression upon Shaw, though he was a serious
man, who could say his say upon religious subjects, and was an elder,
and had sat in the Assembly in his day. He had his opportunity when the
service was over, when the boats were being pushed off from the beach,
and the carriages got under way, for those who had far to go. Mrs.
Forrester had a great many last words to say before she put on her
furred mantle and her white cloud, and took her place in the boat; and
Mysie, who stood ready with the mantle to place it on her mistress's
shoulders, had also her own little talks to carry on at that genial
moment when all the parish--or all the loch, if you like the expression
better--stood about exchanging friendly greetings and news from outlying
places. While all the world was thus engaged, Oona fell at last into the
hands of the factor, and became his prey.

"Miss Oona," he said, "if ye will accord me a moment, I would like well,
well, to know what's your opinion about Lord Erradeen."

"But I have no opinion!" cried Oona, who had been prepared for the
attack. She could not keep herself from blushing (so ridiculous! but I
will do it, she said to herself, as if that "I" was an independent
person over whom she had no control), but otherwise she was on her
guard. "How could I have any opinion when I have only seen Lord Erradeen
twice--thrice?" she added, with a heightening of the blush, as she
remembered the adventure of the coach.

"Twice--thrice; but that gives you facilities--and ladies are so
quick-witted. I've seen him but once," said the factor. "I was much
taken with him, that is the truth, and was so rash as to think our
troubles were over; but here has everything fallen to confusion in the
old way. Miss Oona, do you use your influence if you should see his
lordship again."

"But, Mr. Shaw, there is no likelihood that I shall see him again--and I
have no influence."

"Oh no, you'll not tell me that," said the factor, shaking his head,
with a troubled smile. "Them that are like you, young and bonnie, have
always influence, if they like to use it. And as for seeing him again,
he will never leave the place, Miss Oona, without going at least to bid
you good-bye."

"Lord Erradeen may come to take leave of my mother," said Oona, with
dignity. "It is possible, though he did not say so; but even if he
does, what can I do? I know nothing about his affairs, and I have no
right to say anything to him--no right, more than any one else who has
met him three times."

"Which is just no person--except yourself, so far as I can learn," the
factor said.

"After all, when you come to think of it, it is only once I have seen
him," said Oona, "for the night on the loch was by chance, and the day
on the coach I did not know him; so that after all I have only, so to
speak, seen him once, and how could I venture to speak to him about
business? Oh no, that is out of the question. Yes, mamma, I am quite
ready. Mr. Shaw wishes, if Lord Erradeen comes to bid us good-bye that
we should tell him----"

"Yes?" said Mrs. Forrester, briskly, coming forward, while Mysie
arranged around her her heavy cloak. "I am sure I shall be very glad to
give Lord Erradeen any message. He is a very nice young man, so far as I
can judge; people think him very like my Ronald, Mr. Shaw. Perhaps it
has not struck you? for likenesses are just one of the things that no
two people see. But we are very good friends, him and me: he is just a
nice simple gentlemanly young man--oh, very gentlemanly. He would never
go away without saying good-bye. And I am sure I shall be delighted to
give him any message. That will do, Mysie, that will do; do not
suffocate me with that cloak. Dear me, you have scarcely left me a
corner to breathe out of. But, Mr. Shaw, certainly--any message----"

"I am much obliged to you; but I will no doubt see Lord Erradeen myself,
and I'll not trouble a lady about business," said the factor. He cast a
look at Oona, in which with more reason than usual his eyes said, How
could you do it? And the girl was a little compunctious. She laughed,
but she felt guilty, as she took her mother's arm to lead her to the
boat. Mrs. Forrester had still a dozen things to say, and waved her
hands to the departing groups on every side, while Shaw, half-angry,
stood grimly watching the embarkation.

"There are the Kilhouran Campbells driving away, and I have not had a
word with them: and there is old Jess, who always expects to be taken
notice of: and the Ellermore folk, that I had no time to ask about Tom's
examination: and Mr. Cameron himself, that I never got a chance of
telling how well I liked the sermon. Dear me, Oona, you are always in
such a hurry! And take care now, take care; one would think you took me
for your own age. But I am not wanting to be hoisted up either, as if I
were too old to know how to step into a boat. Good-bye, Mr. Shaw,
good-bye," Mrs. Forrester added cheerfully, waving her hand as she got
herself safely established in the bow, and Hamish, not half so
picturesque as usual in his Sunday clothes, pushed off the boat.
"Good-bye, and I'll not forget your message." She even kissed her hand,
if not to him, to the parish in general, in the friendliness of her
heart.

Mr. Shaw had very nearly shaken his clenched fist in reply. Old fool he
called her in his heart, and even launched an expletive (silently) at
Oona, "the heartless monkey," who had betrayed him to her mother. He
went back to the manse with Mr. Cameron, when all the little talks and
consultations were over and everybody gone, and once more poured out the
story of his perplexities.

"If I do not hear from him, I'll have to proceed to extremities
to-morrow, and it is like to break my heart," he said. "For the poor
folk have got into their heads that I will stand their friend whatever
happens, and they are just keeping their minds easy."

"But, man, they should pay their rents," said Mr. Cameron, who, when all
was said that could be said in his favour, was not a Loch Houran man.

"Rents! where would you have them get the siller? Their bit harvest has
failed, and the cows are dry for want of fodder. If they have a penny
laid by they must take it to live upon. They have enough ado to live,
without thinking of rents."

"But in that case, Shaw," said the minister, gravely--"you must not
blame me for saying so, it's what all the wise men say--would they not
do better to emigrate, and make a new start in a new country, where
there's plenty of room?"

"Oh, I know that argument very well," said Shaw, with a snort of
indignation. "I have it all at my fingers' ends. I've preached it many a
day. But what does it mean, when all's done? It means just sheep or it
means deer, and a pickle roofless houses standing here and there, and
not a soul in the glen. There was a time even when I had just an
enthusiasm for it--and I've sent away as many as most. But after all,
they're harmless, God-fearing folk; the land is the better of them, and
none the worse. There's John Paterson has had great losses with his
sheep, and there's yon English loon that had the shooting, and shot
every feather on the place; both the one and the other will be far more
out of his lordship's pocket than my poor bit crofters. I laid all that
before him; and he showed a manful spirit, that I will always say. No,
minister, it was not to argue the case from its foundations that I came
to you. I know very well what the economists say. I think they're not
more than half right, though they're so cocksure. But if you'll tell me
what I should do----"

This, however, was what Mr. Cameron was not capable of. He said, after
an interval, "I will go to-morrow and try if I can see him, if you think
it would not be ill taken."

"To-morrow is the last day," said the factor gloomily: and after a
little while he followed the example of all the others, and sent for his
dog-cart and drove himself away. But a more anxious man did not traverse
any road in Great Britain on that wintry afternoon: and bitter thoughts
were in his heart of the capricious family, whose interests were in his
hands, and to whom he was almost too faithful a servant. "Oh, the weird
of the Me'vens!" said Mr. Shaw to himself, "if they were not so taken up
with themselves and took more thought for other folk we would hear
little of any weirds. I have no time for weirds. I have just my work to
do and I do it. The Lord preserve us from idleness, and luxury, and
occupation with ourselves!" Here the good man in his righteous wrath and
trouble and disappointment was unjust, as many a good man has been
before.

When Hamish had pushed off from the beach, and the little party were
afloat, Oona repented her of that movement of mingled offence and
_espièglerie_ which had made her transfer the factor's appeal from
herself to her mother: and it was only then that Mrs. Forrester
recollected how imperfect the communication was. "Bless me," Mrs.
Forrester said, "I forgot to ask after all what it was he wanted me to
say. That was a daft like thing, to charge me with a message and never
to tell me what it was. And how can I tell my Lord Erradeen! I suppose
you could not put back, Hamish, to inquire?--but there's nobody left
yonder at the landing that I can see, so it would be little use. How
could you let me do such a silly thing, Oona, my dear?"

"Most likely, mamma, we shall not see Lord Erradeen and so no harm will
be done."

"Not see Lord Erradeen! Do ye think then, Oona, that he has no manners,
or that he's ignorant how to behave? I wonder what has made ye take an
ill-will at such a nice young man. There was nothing in him to justify
it, that I could see. And to think I should have a message for him and
not know what it is! How am I to give him the message when it was never
given to me? I just never heard of such a dilemma. Something perhaps of
importance, and me charged to give it, and not to know what it was!"

"Maybe, mem," said Mysie from the other end of the boat, with that
serene certainty that her mistress's affairs were her own, which
distinguishes an old Scotch family retainer, "maybe Miss Oona will ken."

"Oh, yes, I suppose I know," said Oona, reluctantly. "It is something
about the cotters at the Truach-Glas, who will be turned out to-morrow
unless Lord Erradeen interferes; but why should we be charged with that?
We are very unlikely to see Lord Erradeen, and to-morrow is the day."

This piece of information caused a great excitement in the little party.
The cotters to be turned out!

"But no, no, that was just to frighten you. He will never do it," said
Mrs. Forrester, putting on a smile to reassure herself after a great
flutter and outcry. "No, no; it must just have been to give us all a
fright. John Shaw is a very decent man. I knew his father perfectly
well, who was the minister at Rannoch, and a very good preacher. No, no,
Oona, my dear--he could never do it; and yon fine lad that is so like
my Ronald (though you will not see it) would never do it. You need not
look so pale. It is just his way of joking with you. Many a man thinks
it pleasant to tell a story like that to a lady just to hear what she
says."

"Eh, but it's ill joking with poor folks' lives," cried Mysie, craning
over Hamish's shoulder to hear every word.

"It's none joking," said Hamish, gruffly, between the sweep of his oars.

"It's none joking, say ye? Na, it's grim earnest, or I'm sair mistaken,"
said the woman. "Eh, Miss Oona, but I would gang round the loch on my
bare feet, Sabbath though it be, rather than no give a message like
yon."

"How can we do it?" cried Oona; "how are we to see Lord Erradeen? I am
sure he will not come to call; and even if he did come to-morrow in the
afternoon it would be too late."

"My dear," said Mrs. Forrester, "we will keep a look out in the morning.
Hamish will just be fishing at the point, and hail him as soon as he
sees him. For it was in the morning he came before."

"Oh, mem!" cried Mysie, "but would you wait for that? It's ill to lippen
to a young man's fancy. He might be late of getting up (they're mostly
lazy in the morning), or he might be writing his letters, or he might be
seeing to his guns, or there's just a hundred things he might be doing.
What would ye say if, may-be, Miss Oona was to write one of her bonnie
little notties on that awfu' bonnie paper, with her name upon't, and
tell him ye wanted to see him at ten o'clock or eleven o'clock, or
whatever time you please?"

"Or we might go over to-night in the boat," said Hamish, laconically.

Mrs. Forrester was used to take much counsel. She turned from one to the
other with uncertain looks. "But, Oona," she said, "you are saying
nothing! and you are generally the foremost. If it is not just nonsense
and a joke of John Shaw's----"

"I think," said Oona, "that Mr. Shaw will surely find some other way;
but it was no joke, mother. Who would joke on such a subject? He said if
Lord Erradeen called we were to use our influence."

"That would I," said Mrs. Forrester, "use my influence. I would just tell
him, You must not do it. Bless me, a young man new in the country to
take a step like that and put every person against him! No, no, it is
not possible: but a lady," she added, bridling a little with her smile
of innocent vanity, "a lady may say anything--she may say things that
another person cannot. I would just tell him, You must not do it! and
that would be all that would be needed. But bless me, Oona, how are we
to use our influence unless we can see him?--and I cannot see how we are
to get at him."

"Oh, mem!" cried Mysie, impeding Hamish's oars as she stretched over his
shoulder, "just one of Miss Oona's little notties!"

But this was a step that required much reflection, and at which the
anxious mother shook her head.




CHAPTER XV.


It had rained all night, and the morning was wet and cold; the water
dull like lead, the sky a mass of clouds; all the bare branches of the
trees dropping limp in the humid air. Mrs. Forrester, on further
thought, had not permitted Oona to write even the smallest of her "bit
notties" to Lord Erradeen; for, though she lived on an isle in Loch
Houran, this lady flattered herself that she knew the world. She indited
a little epistle of her own, in which she begged him to come and see her
upon what she might call a matter of business--a thing that concerned
his own affairs. This was carried by Hamish, but it received no reply.
Lord Erradeen was out. Where could he be out on a Sabbath day at night,
in a place where there were no dinner parties, nor any club, nor the
temptations of a town, but just a lonely country place? Nor was there
any answer in the morning, which was more wonderful still. It was
ill-bred, Mrs. Forrester thought, and she was more than ever glad that
her daughter had not been involved in the matter. But Hamish had
information which was not communicated to the drawing-room, and over
which Mysie and he laid their heads together in the kitchen. The poor
young gentleman was off his head altogether, the servants said. The door
was just left open, and he came in, nobody knew when. He could not bear
that anybody should say a word to him. There had been thoughts among
them of sending for his mother, and old Symington showed to Hamish a
telegram prepared for Mr. Milnathort, acquainting him with the state of
affairs, which he had not yet ventured to send--"For he will come to
himself soon or syne," the old man said; "it's just the weird of the
Me'vens that is upon him." Symington was indifferent to the fate of the
poor crofters. He said "the factor will ken what to do." He was not a
Loch Houran man.

On the Monday, however, the feeling of all the little population on the
isle ran very high. The wet morning, the leaden loch, the low-lying
clouds oppressed the mental atmosphere, and the thought of the poor
people turned out of their houses in the rain, increased the misery of
the situation in a way scarcely to be expected in the west, where it is
supposed to rain for ever. At eleven o'clock Oona appeared in her
thickest ulster and her strongest boots.

"I am going up to see old Jenny," she said, with a little air of
determination.

"My dear, you will be just wet through; and are you sure your boots are
thick enough? You will come back to me with a heavy cold, and then what
shall we all do? But take some tea and sugar in your basket, Oona,"
said her mother. She went with the girl to the door in spite of these
half-objections, which did not mean anything. "And a bottle of my ginger
cordial might not be amiss--they all like it, poor bodies! And, Oona,
see, my dear, here are two pound notes. It's all I have of change, and
it's more than I can afford; but if it comes to the worst----But surely,
surely John Shaw, that is a very decent man, and comes of a good family,
will have found the means to do something!"

The kind lady stood at the door indifferent to the wet which every
breath of air shook from the glistening branches. It had ceased to rain,
and in the west there was a pale clearness, which made the leaden loch
more chilly still, yet was a sign of amelioration. Mrs. Forrester wrung
her hands, and cast one look at the glistening woods of Auchnasheen, and
another at the dark mass, on the edge of the water, of Kinloch Houran.
She did not know whether to be angry with Lord Erradeen for being so
ill-bred, or to compassionate him for the eclipse which he had
sustained. But, after all, he was a very secondary object in her mind in
comparison with Oona, whose course she watched in the boat, drawing a
long line across the leaden surface of the water. She was just like the
dove out of the ark, Mrs. Forrester thought.

The little hamlet of Truach-Glas was at some distance from the loch.
Oona walked briskly along the coach road for two miles or thereabouts,
then turned up to the left on a road which narrowed as it ascended till
it became little more than a cart track, with a footway at the side. In
the broader valley below a substantial farmhouse, with a few outlying
cottages, was the only point of habitation, and on either side of the
road a few cultivated fields, chiefly of turnips and potatoes, were all
that broke the stretches of pasture, extending to the left as high as
grass would grow, up the dark slopes of the hills. But the smaller glen
on the right had a more varied and lively appearance, and was broken
into small fields bearing signs of cultivation tolerably high up, some
of them still yellow with the stubble of the late harvest, the poor
little crop of oats or barley which never hoped to ripen before October,
if then. A mountain stream, which was scarcely a thread of water in the
summer, now leaped fiercely enough, turbid and swollen, from rock to
rock in its rapid descent. The houses clustered on a little tableland at
some height above the road, where a few gnarled hawthorns, rowans, and
birches were growing. They were poor enough to have disgusted any social
reformer, or political economist; grey growths of rough stones, which
might have come together by chance, so little shape was there in the
bulging walls. Only a few of them had even the rough chimney at one end
wattled with ropes of straw, which showed an advanced civilisation. The
others had nothing but the hole in the roof, which is the first and
homeliest expedient of primitive ventilation. It might have been
reasonably asked what charm these hovels could have to any one to make
them worth struggling for. But reason is not lord of all.

There was no appearance of excitement about the place when Oona, walking
quickly, and a little out of breath, reached the foremost houses. The
men and boys were out about their work, up the hill, or down the water,
in the occupations of the day; and indeed there were but few men, at any
time, about the place. Three out of the half-dozen houses were tenanted
by "widow women," one with boys who cultivated her little holding, one
who kept going with the assistance of a hired lad, while the third lived
upon her cow, which the neighbours helped her to take care of. The chief
house of the community, and the only one which bore something of a
comfortable aspect, was that of Duncan Fraser, who had the largest
allotment of land, and who, though he had fallen back so far with his
rent as to put himself in the power of the law, was one of the class
which as peasant proprietors are thought to be the strength of France.
If the land had been his own he would have found existence very possible
under the hard and stern conditions which were natural to him, and
probably would have brought up for the Church, Robbie his eldest boy,
who had got all the parish school could give him, and was still
dreaming, as he cut the peats or hoed the potatoes, of Glasgow College
and the world. Of the other two houses, one was occupied by an old pair
whose children were out in the world, and who managed, by the
contributions of distant sons and daughters, to pay their rent. The
last was in the possession of a "weirdless" wight, who loved whisky
better than home or holding, and whose wife and children toiled through
as best they could the labour of their few fields.

There were about twenty children in the six houses, all ruddy,
weatherbeaten, flaxen-haired, the girls tied up about their shoulders in
little tartan shawls, and very bare about their legs; the boys in every
kind of quaint garments, little bags of trousers, cobbled out of bigger
garments by workwomen more frugal than artistic. The rent had failed,
for how was money to be had on these levels? but the porridge had never
altogether failed. A few little ones were playing "about the doors" in a
happy superiority to all prejudices on the subject of mud and puddles.
One woman was washing her clothes at her open door. Old Jenny, whom Oona
had come to see, was out upon her doorstep, gazing down the glen to
watch the footsteps of her precious "coo," which a lass of ten with
streaming hair was leading out to get a mouthful of wet grass. Jenny's
mind was always in a flutter lest something should happen to the cow.

"Ye would pass her by upon the road, Miss Oona," the old woman said,
"and how would ye think she was looking? To get meat to her, it's just
a' my thought; but I canna think she will be none the worse for a bit
mouthfu' on the hill."

"But, Jenny, have you nothing to think of but the cow? It will not be
true then, that the time of grace is over, and that the sheriff's
officers are coming to turn you all out?"

"The sheriff's officers!" cried Jenny. She took the edge of her apron in
her hand and drew the hem slowly through her fingers, which was a sign
of perplexity: but yet she was quite composed. "Na, na, Miss Oona,
they'll never turn us out. What wad I be thinking about but the coo?
She's my breadwinner and a' my family. Hoots no, they'll never turn us
out."

"But Mr. Shaw was in great trouble yesterday. He said this was the last
day----"

"I never fash'd my thoom about it," said Jenny. "The last day! It's
maybe the last, or the first, I would never be taking no notice. For the
factor, he's our great friend, and he would not be letting them do it.
No, no; it would but be his jokes," the old woman said.

Was it his jokes? This was the second time the idea had been presented
to her; but Oona remembered the factor's serious face.

"You all seem very quiet here," she said; "not as if any trouble was
coming. But has there not been trouble, Jenny, about your rent or
something?"

"Muckle trouble," said Jenny; "they were to have taken the coo. What
would have become of me if they had ta'en the coo? Duncan, they have
ta'en his, puir lad. To see it go down the brae was enough to break your
heart. But John Shaw he's a kind man; he would not be letting them
meddle with us. He just said 'It's a lone woman; my lord can do without
it better than the old wife can do without it,' he said. He's a kind
man, and so my bonnie beast was saved. I was wae for Duncan; but still,
Miss Oona, things is no desperate so lang as you keep safe your ain
coo."

"That is true," said Oona with a little laugh. There must, she thought,
be some mistake, or else Mr. Shaw had found Lord Erradeen, and without
the help of any influence had moved him to pity the cotters. Under this
consolation she got out her tea and sugar, and other trifles which had
been put into the basket. It was a basket that was well known in the
neighbourhood, and had conveyed many a little dainty in time of need.
Jenny was grateful for the little packets of tea and sugar which she
took more or less as a right, but looked with a curious eye at the
"ginger cordial" for which Mrs. Forrester was famous. It was not a
wicked thing like whisky, no, no: but it warmed ye on a cold day. Jenny
would not have objected to a drop. While she eyed it there became
audible far off voices down the glen, and sounds as of several people
approaching, sounds very unusual in this remote corner of the world.
Jenny forgot the ginger cordial and Oona ran to the door to see what it
was, and the woman who had been washing paused in her work, and old
Nancy Robertson, she whose rent was paid, and who had no need to fear
any sheriff's officers, came out to her door. Even the children stopped
in their game.

The voices were still far off, down upon the road, upon which there was
a group of men, scarcely distinguishable at this distance. Simon
Fraser's wife, she who had been washing, called out that it was Duncan
talking to the factor; but who were those other men? A sense of
approaching trouble came upon the women. Nelly Fraser wiped the soapsuds
from her arms, and wrung her hands still fresh from her tub. She was
always prepared for evil, as is natural to a woman with a "weirdless"
husband. Old Jenny, for her part, thought at once of the coo. She flew,
as well as her old legs would carry her, to the nearest knoll, and
shrieked to the fair-haired little lass who was slowly following that
cherished animal to bring Brockie back. "Bring her back, ye silly thing.
Will ye no be seeing--but I mauna say that," she added in an undertone.
"Bring back the coo! Bring her back! Jessie, my lamb, bring back the
coo." What with old Jenny shrieking, and the voices in the distance, and
something magnetic and charged with disorder in the air, people began to
appear from all the houses. One of the widow's sons, a red and hairy
lad, came running in, in his heavy boots, from the field where he was
working. Duncan Fraser's daughter set down a basket of peat which she
was carrying in, and called her mother to the door. "There's my father
with the factor and twa-three strange men," said the girl, "and oh, what
will they be wanting here?" Thus the women and children looked on with
growing terror, helpless before the approach of fate, as they might have
done two centuries before, when the invaders were rapine and murder,
instead of calm authority and law.

When Oona made her appearance half an hour before everything had been
unquestioning tranquillity and peace. Now, without a word said, all was
alarm. The poor people did not know what was going to happen, but they
felt that something was going to happen. They had been living on a
volcano, easily, quietly, without thinking much of it. But now the fire
was about to blaze forth. Through the minds of those that were mothers
there ran a calculation as swift as light. "What will we do with the
bairns? what will we do with Granny? and the bits of plenishing?" they
said to each other. The younger ones were half pleased with the
excitement, not knowing what it was. Meantime Duncan and Mr. Shaw came
together up the road, the poor man arguing with great animation and
earnestness, the factor listening with a troubled countenance and
sometimes shaking his head. Behind them followed the servants of the
law, those uncomfortable officials to whom the odium of their occupation
clings, though it is no fault of theirs.

"No, Mr. Shaw, we canna pay. You know that as well as I do; but oh, sir,
give us a little time. Would you turn the weans out on the hill and the
auld folk? What would I care if it was just to me? But think upon the
wake creatures--my auld mother that is eighty, and the bairns. If my
lord will not let us off there's some of the other gentry that are kind
and will lend us a helping hand. Oh, give us time! My lord that is
young and so well off, he canna surely understand. What is it to him?
and to us it's life and death."

"Duncan, my man," said the factor, "you are just breaking my heart. I
know all that as well as you; but what can I do? It is the last day, and
we have to act or we just make fools of ourselves. My lord might have
stopped it, but he has not seen fit. For God's sake say no more for I
cannot do it. Ye just break my heart!"

By this time the women were within hearing, and stood listening with
wistful faces, turning from one to another. When he paused they struck
in together, moving towards him eagerly.

"Oh, Mr. Shaw, you've always been our friend," cried Duncan's wife; "you
canna mean that you've come to turn us out to the hill, with all the
little ones and granny?"

"Oh, sir!" cried the other, "have pity upon me that has nae prop nor
help but just a weirdless man."

"Me, I have nae man ava, but just thae hands to travail for my bairns,"
said a third.

And then there came a shriller tone of indignation. "The young lord,
he'll just get a curse--he'll get no blessing."

The factor made a deprecating gesture with his hands "I can do nothing,
I can do nothing," he said. "Take your bairns down the glen to my
housekeeper Marg'ret; take them down to the town, the rest of ye--they
shall not want. Whatever I can do, I'll do. But for God's sake do not
stop us with your wailin', for it has to be done; it is no fault of
mine."

This appeal touched one of the sufferers at least with a movement of
fierce irony. Duncan uttered a short, sharp laugh, which rung strangely
into the air, so full of passion. "Haud your tongues, women," he cried,
"and no vex Mr. Shaw; you're hurting his feelings," with a tone
impossible to describe, in which wrath and misery and keen indignation
and ridicule contended for the mastery. He was the only man in the
desolate group. He drew a few steps apart and folded his arms upon his
breast, retiring in that pride of despair which a cotter ruined may
experience no less than a king vanquished, from further struggle or
complaint. The women neither understood nor noted the finer meaning in
his words. They had but one thought, the misery before them. They
crowded round the factor, all speaking in one breath, grasping his arm
to call his attention--almost mobbing him with distracted appeals, with
the wild natural eloquence of their waving hands and straining eyes.

Meanwhile there were other elements, some comic enough, in the curious
circle round. Old Nancy Robertson had not left the doorstep where she
stood keenly watching in the composure and superiority of one whom
nobody could touch, who had paid her rent, and was above the world. It
was scarcely possible not to be a little complacent in the superiority
of her circumstances, or to refrain from criticising the unseemly
excitement of the others. She had her spectacles on her nose, and her
head projected, and she thought they were all like play-actors with
their gesticulations and cries. "I wouldna be skreighin' like that--no
me," she said. Round about the fringe of children gaped and gazed, some
stolid with amaze, some pale in a vague sympathetic misery, none of them
quite without a certain enjoyment of this extraordinary episode and
stimulation of excitement. And old Jenny, awakened to no alarm about her
cottage, still stood upon her knoll, with her whole soul intent upon the
fortunes of Brockie, who had met the sheriff's officers in full career.
The attempts of her little guardian to turn the cow back from her whiff
of pasture had only succeeded in calling the special attention of these
invaders. They stopped short, and one of them taking a piece of rope
from his pocket secured it round the neck of the frightened animal, who
stood something like a woman in a similar case, looking to left and to
right, not knowing in her confusion which way to bolt, though the
intention was evident in her terrified eyes. At this Jenny gave a shriek
of mingled rage and terror, which in its superior force and concentrated
passion rang through all the other sounds, silencing for the moment even
the wailing of the women--and flung herself into the midst of the
struggle. She was a dry, little, withered old woman, nimble and light,
and ran like a hare or rabbit down the rough road without a pause or
stumble.

"My coo!" cried Jenny, "ye sallna tak' her; ye sall tak' my heart's
blood first. My coo! Miss Oona, Miss Oona, will you just be standing by,
like nothing at all, and letting them tak' my coo? G'way, ye robbers,"
Jenny shrieked, flinging one arm about the neck of the alarmed brute,
while she pushed away its captor with the other. Her arm was still
vigorous, though she was old. The man stumbled and lost his hold of the
rope; the cow, liberated, tossed head and tail into the air and flung
off to the hill-side like a deer. The shock threw Jenny down and stunned
her. This made a little diversion in the dismal scene above.

And now it became evident that whatever was to be done must be done,
expression being exhausted on the part of the victims, who stood about
in a blank of overwrought feeling awaiting the next move. The factor
made a sign with his hand, and sat down upon a ledge of rock opposite
the cottages, his shaggy eyebrows curved over his eyes, his hat drawn
down upon his brows. A sort of silent shock ran through the beholders
when the men entered the first cottage: and when they came out again
carrying a piece of furniture, there was a cry, half savage in its wild
impotence. Unfortunately the first thing that came to their hands was a
large wooden cradle, in which lay a baby tucked up under the big
patchwork quilt, which bulged out on every side. As it was set down upon
its large rockers on the uneven ground the little sleeper gave a
startled wail; and then it was that that cry, sharp and keen, dividing
the silence like a knife, burst from the breasts of the watching people.
It was Nelly Fraser's baby, who had the "weirdless" man. She stood with
her bare arms wrapped in her apron beside her abandoned washing-tub, and
gazed as if incapable of movement, with a face like ashes, at the
destruction of her home. But while the mother stood stupefied, a little
thing of three or four, which had been clinging to her skirts in keen
baby wonder and attention, when she saw the cradle carried forth into
the open air immediately took the place of guardian. Such an incident
had never happened in all little Jeanie's experience before. She trotted
forth, abandoning all alarm, to the road in which it was set down, and,
turning a little smiling face of perfect content to the world, began to
rock it softly with little coos of soothing and rills of infant
laughter. The sombre background round, with all its human misery, made a
dismal foil to this image of innocent satisfaction. The factor jumped up
and turned his back upon the scene altogether, biting his nails and
lowering his brows in a fury of wretchedness. And at last the poor women
began to stir and take whispered counsel with each other. There was no
longer room for either hope or entreaty; the only thing to be thought of
now was what to do.

The next cottage was that of Nancy Robertson, who still held her
position on her doorstep, watching the proceedings with a keen but
somewhat complacent curiosity. They gave her an intense sense of
self-importance and superiority, though she was not without feeling.
When, however, the men, who had warmed to their work, and knew no
distinction between one and another, approached her, a sudden panic and
fury seized the old woman. She defied them shrilly, flying at the throat
of the foremost with her old hands. The wretchedness of the poor women
whose children were being thrust out shelterless did not reach the wild
height of passion of her whose lawful property was threatened.

"Villains!" she shrieked, "will ye break into my hoose? What right have
ye in my hoose? I'll brack your banes afore you put a fit into my
hoose."

"Whist, whist, wife," said one of the men; "let go now, or I'll have to
hurt ye. You canna stop us. You'll just do harm to yourself."

"John Shaw, John Shaw," shrieked Nancy, "do ye see what they're doing?
and me that has paid my rent, no like those weirdless fuils. Do ye hear
me speak? I've paid my rent to the last farden. I've discharged a' my
debts, as I wuss ithers would discharge their debts to me." Her voice
calmed down as the factor turned and made an impatient sign to the men.
"Ye see," said Nancy, making a little address to her community, "what it
is to have right on your side. They canna meddle with me. My man's auld,
and I have everything to do for mysel', but they canna lay a hand on
me.

"Oh, hold your tongue, woman," cried Duncan Fraser. "If ye canna help
us, ye can let us be."

"And wha says that I canna help ye? I am just saying--I pay my debts as
I wuss that ithers should pay their debts to me: and that's Scripter,"
said Nancy; but she added, "I never said I would shut my door to a
neebor: ye can bring in Granny here; I'm no just a heart of stane like
that young lord."

The women had not waited to witness Nancy's difficulties. Most of them
had gone into their houses, to take a shawl from a cupboard, a book from
the "drawers-head." One or two appeared with the family Bible under
their arm. "The Lord kens where we are to go, but we must go somewhere,"
they said. There was a little group about Oona and her two pound notes.
The moment of excitement was over, and they had now nothing to do but to
meet their fate. The factor paced back and forward on the path, going
out of his way to avoid here and there a pile of poor furniture. And the
work of devastation went on rapidly: it is so easy, alas, to dismantle a
cottage with its but and ben. Duncan Fraser did not move till two or
three had been emptied. When he went in to bring out his mother, there
was a renewed sensation among the worn-out people who were scarcely
capable of any further excitement. Granny was Granny to all the glen.
She was the only survivor of her generation. They had all known her from
their earliest days. They stood worn and sorrow-stricken, huddled
together in a little crowd, waiting before they took any further steps,
till Granny should come.

But it was not Granny who came first. Some one, a stranger even to the
children, whose attention was so easily attracted by any novelty,
appeared suddenly round a corner of the hill. He paused at the
unexpected sight of the little cluster of habitations; for the country
was unknown to him; and for a moment appeared as if he would have turned
back. But the human excitement about this scene caught him in spite of
himself. He gazed at it for a moment trying to divine what was
happening, then came on slowly with hesitating steps. He had been out
all the morning, as he had been for some days before. His being had
sustained a great moral shock, and for the moment all his holds on life
seemed gone. This was the first thing that had moved him even to the
faintest curiosity. He came forward slowly, observed by no one. The
factor was still standing with his back to the woeful scene, gloomily
contemplating the distant country, while Oona moved about in the midst
of the women, joining in their consultations, and doing her best to
rouse poor Nelly, who sat by her baby's cradle like a creature dazed and
capable of no further thought. There was, therefore, no one to recognise
Lord Erradeen as he came slowly into the midst of this tragedy, not
knowing what it was. The officials had recovered their spirits as they
got on with their work. Natural pity and sympathetic feeling had yielded
to the carelessness of habit and common occupation. They had begun to
make rough jokes with each other, to fling the cotters' possessions
carelessly out of the windows, to give each other catches with a "Hi!
tak' this," flinging the things about. Lord Erradeen had crossed the
little bridge, and was in the midst of the action of the painful drama,
when they brought out from Duncan's house his old mother's chair. It was
cushioned with pillows, one of which tumbled out into the mud and was
roughly caught up by the rough fellow who carried it, and flung at his
companion's head, with a laugh and jest. It was he who first caught
sight of the stranger, a new figure among the disconsolate crowd. He
gave a whistle to his comrade to announce a novelty, and rattled down
hastily out of his hands the heavy chair. Walter was wholly roused by
the strangeness of this pantomime. It brought back something to his
mind, though he could scarcely tell what. He stepped in front of the man
and asked, "What does this mean?" in a hasty and somewhat imperious
tone; but his eyes answered his question almost before he had asked it.
Nelly Fraser with her pile of furniture, her helpless group of children,
her stupefied air of misery, was full in the foreground, and the ground
was strewed with other piles. Half of the houses in the hamlet were
already gutted. One poor woman was lifting her bedding out of the wet,
putting it up upon chairs; another stood regarding hers helplessly, as
if without energy to attempt even so small a salvage.

"What is the meaning of all this?" the young man cried imperiously
again.

His voice woke something in the deep air of despondency and misery which
had not been there before. It caught the ear of Oona, who pushed the
women aside in sudden excitement. It roused--was it a faint thrill of
hope in the general despair? Last of all it reached the factor, who,
standing gloomily apart, had closed himself up in angry wretchedness
against any appeal. He did not hear this, but somehow felt it in the
air, and turned round, not knowing what the new thing was. When he saw
Lord Erradeen, Shaw was seized as with a sudden frenzy. He turned round
upon him sharply, with an air which was almost threatening.

"What does it mean?" he said. "It means your will and pleasure, Lord
Erradeen, not mine. God is my witness, no will of mine. You brute!"
cried the factor, suddenly, "what are you doing? Stand out of the way,
and let the honest woman pass. Get out of her way, I tell you, or I'll
send ye head foremost down the glen!"

This sudden outcry, which was a relief to the factor's feelings, was
addressed not to Walter, but to the man who, coming out again with a new
armful, came rudely in the way of the old Granny, to whom all the glen
looked up, and who was coming out with a look of bewilderment on her
aged face, holding by her son's arm. Granny comprehended vaguely, if at
all, what was going on. She gave a momentary glance of suspicion at the
fellow who pushed against her, then looked out with a faint smile at the
two gentlemen standing in front of the door. Her startled mind recurred
to its old instincts with but a faint perception of anything new.

"Sirs," she said, in her feeble old voice, "I am distressed I canna ask
ye in; but I'm feckless mysel, being a great age, and there's some
flitting going on, and my good-daughter she is out of the way."

"Do you hear that, my lord?" cried Shaw; "the old wife is making her
excuses for not asking you into a house you are turning her out of at
the age of eighty-three. Oh, I am not minding if I give ye offence! I
have had enough of it. Find another factor, Lord Erradeen. I would
rather gather stones upon the fields than do again what I have done this
day."

Walter looked about like a man awakened from a dream. He said, almost
with awe--

"Is this supposed to be done by me? I know nothing of it, nor the
reason. What is the reason? I disown it altogether as any act of mine."

"Oh, my lord," cried Shaw, who was in a state of wild excitement, "there
is the best of reasons. Rent--your lordship understands that--a little
more money lest your coffers should not be full enough. And as for these
poor bodies, they have so much to put up with, a little more does not
matter. They have not a roof to their heads, but that's nothing to your
lordship. You can cover the hills with sheep, and they can--die--if
they like," cried the factor, avenging himself for all he had suffered.
He turned away with a gesture of despair and fury. "I have done enough;
I wash my hands of it," he cried.

Walter cast around him a bewildered look. To his own consciousness he
was a miserable and helpless man; but all the poor people about gazed at
him, wistful, deprecating, as at a sort of unknown, unfriendly god, who
had their lives in his hands. The officers perhaps thought it a good
moment to show their zeal in the eyes of the young lord. They made a
plunge into the house once more, and appeared again, one carrying
Duncan's bed, a great, slippery, unwieldy sack of chaff, another charged
with the old, tall, eight-day clock, which he jerked along as if it had
been a man hopping from one foot to another.

"We'll soon be done, my lord," the first said in an encouraging tone,
"and then a' the commotion will just die away."

Lord Erradeen had been lost in a miserable dream. He woke up now at this
keen touch of reality, and found himself in a position so abhorrent and
antagonistic to all his former instincts and traditions, that his very
being seemed to stand still in the horror of the moment. Then a sudden
passionate energy filled all his veins. The voice in which he ordered
the men back rang through the glen. He had flung himself upon one of
them in half-frantic rage, before he was aware what he was doing,
knocking down the astounded official, who got up rubbing his elbow, and
declaring it was no fault of his; while Walter glared at him, not
knowing what he did. But after this encounter with flesh and blood Lord
Erradeen recovered his reason. He turned round quickly, and with his own
hands carried back Granny's chair. The very weight of it, the touch of
something to do, brought life into his veins. He took the old woman from
her son's arm, and led her in reverently, supporting her upon his own:
then going out again without a word, addressed himself to the manual
work of restoration. From the moment of his first movement, the whole
scene changed in the twinkling of an eye. The despairing apathy of the
people gave way to a tumult of haste and activity. Duncan Fraser was the
first to move.

"My lord!" he cried; "if you are my lord," his stern composure yielding
to tremulous excitement, "if it's your good will and pleasure to let us
bide, that's all we want. Take no trouble for us; take no thought for
that." Walter gave him a look, almost without intelligence. He had not a
word to say. He was not sufficiently master of himself to express the
sorrow and anger and humiliation in his awakened soul; but he could
carry back the poor people's things, which was a language of nature not
to be misunderstood. He went on taking no heed of the eager assistance
offered on all sides. "I'll do it, my lord. Oh, dinna you trouble. It's
ower much kindness. Ye'll fyle your fingers; ye'll wear out your
strength. We'll do it; we'll do it," the people cried.

The cottagers' doors flew open as by magic; they worked all together,
the women, the children, and Duncan Fraser, and Lord Erradeen. Even Oona
joined, carrying the little children back to their homes, picking up
here a bird in a cage, there a little stunted geranium or musk in a pot.
In half an hour it seemed, or less, the whole was done, and when the
clouds that had been lowering on the hills and darkening the atmosphere
broke and began to pour down torrents of rain upon the glen, the little
community was housed and comfortable once more.

While this excitement lasted Walter was once more the healthful and
vigorous young man who had travelled with Oona on the coach, and laughed
with her on the Isle. But when the storm was over, and they walked
together towards the loch, she became aware of the difference in him. He
was very serious, pale, almost haggard now that the excitement was over.
His smiling lips smiled no longer, there was in his eyes, once so
light-hearted and careless, a sort of hunted, anxious look.

"No," he said, in answer to her questions, "I have not been ill; I have
had--family matters to occupy me: and of this I knew nothing. Letters? I
had none, I received nothing. I have been occupied, too much perhaps,
with--family affairs."

Upon this no comment could be made, but his changed looks made so great
a claim upon her sympathy that Oona looked at him with eyes that were
almost tender in their pity. He turned round suddenly and met her
glance.

"You know," he said, with a slight tremble in his voice, "that there are
some things--they say in every family--a little hard to bear. But I have
been too much absorbed--I was taken by surprise. It shall happen no
more." He held his head high, and looked round him as if to let some one
else see the assurance he was giving her. "I promise you," he added, in
a tone that rang like a defiance, "it shall happen no more!" Then he
added hurriedly with a slight swerve aside, and trembling in his voice,
"Do you think I might come with you? Would Mrs. Forrester have me at the
Isle?"


END OF VOL. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Note: Hyphen variations left as printed.]


[The end of _The Wizard's Son, Volume 1_ by Margaret Oliphant]






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIZARD'S SON, VOL. 1 (OF 3) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Wizard's Son, Vol. 1 (of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Wizard's Son, Vol. 1 (of 3)


Author: Mrs. Oliphant

Release date: December 6, 2014 [eBook #47555]
                Most recently updated: December 18, 2015

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan & the online
        Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
        http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
        images generously made available by The Internet
        Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIZARD'S SON, VOL. 1 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









                     THE WIZARD'S SON

                         A Novel

                     BY MRS. OLIPHANT

    AUTHOR OF "THE CURATE IN CHARGE," "YOUNG MUSGRAVE," ETC.


    IN THREE VOLUMES
    VOL. I.

    London
    MACMILLAN AND CO.
    1884

    [_The Right of Translation and Reproduction is Reserved_]

    LONDON:
    R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS,
    BREAD STREET HILL.




THE WIZARD'S SON.




CHAPTER I.


The Methvens occupied a little house in the outskirts of a little town
where there was not very much going on of any description, and still
less which they could take any share in, being, as they were, poor and
unable to make any effective response to the civilities shown to them.
The family consisted of three persons--the mother, who was a widow with
one son; the son himself, who was a young man of three or four and
twenty; and a distant cousin of Mrs. Methven's, who lived with her,
having no other home. It was not a very happy household. The mother had
a limited income and an anxious temper; the son a somewhat volatile and
indolent disposition, and no ambition at all as to his future, nor
anxiety as to what was going to happen to him in life. This, as may be
supposed, was enough to introduce many uneasy elements into their joint
existence; and the third of the party, Miss Merivale, was not of the
class of the peacemakers to whom Scripture allots a special blessing.
She had no amiable glamour in her eyes, but saw her friends'
imperfections with a clearness of sight which is little conducive to
that happy progress of affairs which is called "getting on." The
Methvens were sufficiently proud to keep their difficulties out of the
public eye, but on very many occasions, unfortunately, it had become
very plain to themselves that they did not "get on." It was not any want
of love. Mrs. Methven was herself aware, and her friends were in the
constant habit of saying, that she had sacrificed everything for Walter.
Injudicious friends are fond of making such statements, by way, it is to
be supposed, of increasing the devotion and gratitude of the child to
the parent: but the result is, unfortunately, very often the exact
contrary of what is desired--for no one likes to have his duty in this
respect pointed out to him, and whatever good people may think, it is
not in itself an agreeable thought that "sacrifices" have been made for
one, and an obligation placed upon one's shoulders from the beginning of
time, independent of any wish or claim upon the part of the person
served. The makers of sacrifices have seldom the reward which
surrounding spectators, and in many cases themselves, think their due.
Mrs. Methven herself would probably have been at a loss to name what
were the special sacrifices she had made for Walter. She had remained a
widow, but that she would have been eager to add was no sacrifice. She
had pinched herself more or less to find the means for his education,
which had been of what is supposed in England to be the best kind: and
she had, while he was a boy, subordinated her own tastes and pleasures
to his, and eagerly sought out everything that was likely to be
agreeable to him. When they took their yearly journey--as it is considered
necessary for him--places that Walter liked, or where he could find
amusement, or had friends, were eagerly sought for. "Women," Mrs.
Methven said, "can make themselves comfortable anywhere; but a boy, you
know, is quite different." "Quite," Miss Merivale would say: "Oh, if you
only knew them as well as we do; they are creatures entirely without
resources. You must put their toys into their very hands." "There is no
question of toys with Walter--he has plenty of resources. It is not
that," Mrs. Methven would explain, growing red. "I hope I am not one of
the silly mothers that thrust their children upon everybody: but, of
course, a boy must be considered. Everybody who has had to do with
men--or boys--knows that they must be considered." A woman whose life
has been mixed up with these troublesome beings feels the superiority of
her experience to those who know nothing about them. And in this way,
without spoiling him or treating him with ridiculous devotion, as the
king of her fate, Walter had been "considered" all his life.

For the rest, Mrs. Methven had, it must be allowed, lived a much more
agreeable life in the little society of Sloebury when her son was young
than she did now that he had come to years, mis-named, of discretion.
Then she had given her little tea-parties, or even a small occasional
dinner, at which her handsome boy would make his appearance when it was
holiday time, interesting everybody; or, when absent, would still
furnish a very pleasant subject of talk to the neighbours, who thought
his mother did a great deal too much for him, but still were pleased to
discuss a boy who was having the best of educations, and at a public
school. In those days she felt herself very comfortable in Sloebury, and
was asked to all the best houses, and felt a modest pride in the
certainty that she was able to offer something in return. But matters
were very different when Walter was four-and-twenty instead of fourteen.
By that time it was apparent that he was not going to take the world by
storm, or set the Thames on fire; and, though she had been too sensible
to brag, Mrs. Methven had thought both these things possible, and
perhaps had allowed it to be perceived that she considered something
great, something out of the way, to be Walter's certain career. But
twenty-four is, as she said herself, so different! He had been
unsuccessful in some of his examinations, and for others he had not been
"properly prepared." His mother did not take refuge in the thought that
the examiners were partial or the trials unfair; but there was naturally
always a word as to the reason why he did not succeed--he had not been
"properly prepared." He knew of one only a few days before the eventful
moment, and at this time of day, she asked indignantly, when everything
is got by competition, how is a young man who has not "crammed" to get
the better of one who has? The fact remained that at twenty-four,
Walter, evidently a clever fellow, with a great many endowments, had got
nothing to do; and, what was worse--a thing which his mother, indeed,
pretended to be unconscious of, but which everybody else in the town
remarked upon--he was not in the least concerned about this fact, but
took his doing nothing quite calmly as the course of nature, and neither
suffered from it, nor made any effort to place himself in a different
position. He "went in for" an examination when it was put before him as
a thing to do, and took his failure more than philosophically when he
failed, as, as yet, he had always done: and, in the mean time,
contentedly lived on, without disturbing himself, and tranquilly let the
time go by--the golden time which should have shaped his life.

This is not a state of affairs which can bring happiness to any
household. There is a kind of parent--or rather it should be said of a
mother, for no parent of the other sex is supposed capable of so much
folly--to whom everything is good that her child, the cherished object
of her affections, does; and this is a most happy regulation of nature,
and smooths away the greatest difficulties of life for many
simple-hearted folk, without doing half so much harm as is attributed to
it; for disapproval has little moral effect, and lessens the happiness
of all parties, without materially lessening the sins of the erring.
But, unfortunately, Mrs. Methven was not of this happy kind. She saw her
son's faults almost too clearly, and they gave her the most poignant
pain. She was a proud woman, and that he should suffer in the opinion of
the world was misery and grief to her. She was stung to the heart by
disappointment in the failure of her many hopes and projects for him.
She was stricken with shame to think of all the fine things that had
been predicted of Walter in his boyish days, and that not one of them
had come true. People had ceased now to speak of the great things that
Walter would do. They asked "_What_ was he going to do?" in an entirely
altered tone, and this went to her heart. Her pride suffered the most
terrible blow. She could not bear the thought; and though she maintained
a calm face to the world, and represented herself as entirely satisfied,
Walter knew otherwise, and had gradually replaced his old careless
affection for his mother by an embittered opposition and resistance to
her, which made both their lives wretched enough. How it was that he did
not make an effort to escape from her continual remonstrances, her
appeals and entreaties, her censure and criticism, it is very difficult
to tell. To have gone away, and torn her heart with anxiety, but
emancipated himself from a yoke which it was against the dignity of his
manhood to bear, would have been much more natural. But he had no
money, and he had not the energy to seize upon any way of providing for
himself. Had such an opportunity fallen at his feet he would probably
have accepted it with fervour; but Fortune did not put herself out of
the way to provide for him, nor he to be provided for. Notwithstanding
the many scenes which took place in the seclusion of that poor little
house, when the mother, what with love, shame, mortification, and
impatience, would all but rave in impotent passion, appealing to him, to
the pride, the ambition, the principle which so far as could be seen the
young man did not possess, Walter held upon his way with an obstinate
pertinacity, and did nothing. How he managed to do this without losing
all self-respect and every better feeling it is impossible to say; but
he did so somehow, and was still "a nice enough fellow," notwithstanding
that everybody condemned him; and had not even lost the good opinion of
the little society, though it was unanimous in blame. The only way in
which he responded to his mother's remonstrances and complaints was by
seeking his pleasure and such occupation as contented him--which
was a little cricket now and then, a little lawn-tennis, a little
flirtation--as far away from her as possible; and by being as little at
home as possible. His temper was a little spoilt by the scenes which
awaited him when he went home; and these seemed to justify to himself
his gradual separation from his mother's house: but never induced him to
sacrifice, or even modify, his own course. He appeared to think that he
had a justification for his conduct in the opposition it met with; and
that his pride was involved in the necessity for never giving in. If he
had been let alone, he represented to himself, everything would have
been different; but to yield to this perpetual bullying was against
every instinct. And even the society which disapproved so much gave a
certain encouragement to Walter in this point of view: for it was Mrs.
Methven whom everybody blamed. It was her ridiculous pride, or her
foolish indulgence, or her sinful backing-up of his natural indolence;
even some people thought it was her want of comprehension of her son
which had done it, and that Walter would have been entirely a different
person in different hands. If she had not thought it a fine thing to
have him appear as a useless fine gentleman above all necessity of
working for his living, it was incredible that he could have allowed the
years to steal by without making any exertion. This was what the town
decided, not without a good deal of sympathy for Walter. What could be
expected? Under the guidance of a foolish mother, a young man always
went wrong; and in this case he did not go wrong, poor fellow! he only
wasted his existence, nothing worse. Sloebury had much consideration for
the young man.

Perhaps it added something to the exasperation with which Mrs. Methven
saw all her efforts fail that she had some perception of this, and knew
that it was supposed to be her fault. No doubt in her soul it added to
the impatience and indignation and pain with which she contemplated the
course of affairs, which she was without strength to combat, yet could
not let alone. Now and then, indeed, she did control herself so far as
to let them alone, and then there was nothing but tranquillity and peace
in the house. But she was a conscientious woman, and, poor soul! she had
a temper--the very complacency and calm with which her son went upon his
way, the approval he showed of her better conduct when she left him to
his own devices, struck her in some moments with such sudden indignation
and pain, that she could no longer contain herself. He, who might have
been anything he pleased, to be nothing! He, of whom everybody had
predicted such great things! At such moments the sight of Walter
smiling, strolling along with his hands in his pockets, excited her
almost to frenzy. Poor lady! So many women would have been proud of
him--a handsome young fellow in flannels, with his cricket bat or his
racquet when occasion served. But love and injured pride were bitter in
her heart, and she could not bear the sight. All this while, however,
nobody knew anything about the scenes that arose in the little house,
which preserved a show of happiness and tender union long after the
reality was gone. Indeed, even Miss Merivale, who had unbounded
opportunities of knowing, took a long time to make up her mind that
Walter and his mother did not "get on."

Such was the unfortunate state of affairs at the time when this history
begins. The Methvens were distantly connected, it was known, with a
great family in Scotland, which took no notice whatever of them, and,
indeed, had very little reason so to do, Captain Methven being long
since dead, and his widow and child entirely unknown to the noble house,
from which it was so great an honour to derive a little, much-diluted,
far-off drop of blood, more blue and more rich than the common. It is
possible that had the connection been by Mrs. Methven's side she would
have known more about it, and taken more trouble to keep up her
knowledge of the family. But it was not so, and she had even in her
younger days been conscious of little slights and neglects which had
made her rather hostile than otherwise to the great people from whom her
husband came. "I know nothing about the Erradeens," she would say; "they
are much too grand to take any notice of us: and I am too proud to seek
any notice from them."

"I am afraid, my dear, there is a good deal in that," said old Mrs.
Wynn, the wife of the old rector, shaking her white head. This lady was
a sort of benign embodiment of justice in Sloebury. She punished nobody,
but she saw the right and wrong with a glance that was almost
infallible, and shook her head though she never exacted any penalty.

Here Miss Merivale would seize the occasion to strike in--

"Prejudice is prejudice," she said, "whatever form it takes. A lord has
just as much chance of being nice as an--apothecary." This was said
because the young doctor, newly admitted into his father's business,
who thought no little of himself, was within reach, and just then caught
Miss Merivale's eye.

"That is a very safe speech, seeing there are neither lords nor
apothecaries here," he said with the blandest smile. He was not a man to
be beaten at such a game.

"But a lord may have influence, you know. For Walter's sake I would not
lose sight of him," said Mrs. Wynn.

"You cannot lose sight of what you have never seen: besides, influence
is of no consequence nowadays. Nobody can do anything for you--save
yourself," said Mrs. Methven with a little sigh. Her eyes turned
involuntarily to where Walter was. He was always in the middle of
everything that was going on. Among the Sloebury young people he had a
little air of distinction, or so at least his mother thought. She was
painfully impartial, and generally, in her anxiety, perceived his bad
points rather than his good ones; but as she glanced at the group, love
for once allowed itself to speak, though always with an accent peculiar
to the character of the thinker. She allowed to herself that he had an
air of distinction, a something more than the others--alas, that nothing
ever came of it! The others all, or almost all, were already launched in
the world. They were doing or trying to do something--whereas Walter!
But she took care that nobody should hear that irrepressible sigh.

"I am very sorry for it," said Mrs. Wynn, "for there are many people
who would never push for themselves, and yet do very well indeed when
they are put in the way."

"I am all for the pushing people," said Miss Merivale. "I like the new
state of affairs. When every one stands for himself, and you get just as
much as you work for, there will be no grudges and sulkings with
society. Though I'm a Tory, I like every man to make his own way."

"A lady's politics are never to be calculated upon," said the Rector,
who was standing up against the fire on his own hearth, rubbing his old
white hands. "It is altogether against the principles of Toryism, my
dear lady, that a man should make his own way. It is sheer democracy. As
for that method of examinations, it is one of the most levelling
principles of the time--it is one of Mr. Gladstone's instruments for the
destruction of society. When the son of a cobbler is just as likely to
come to high command as your son or mine, what is to become of the
country?" the old clergyman said, lifting those thin white hands.

Mr. Gladstone's name was as a firebrand thrown into the midst of this
peaceable little country community. The speakers all took fire. They
thought that there was no doubt about what was going to come of the
country. It was going to destruction as fast as fate could carry it.
When society had dropped to pieces, and the rabble had come uppermost,
and England had become a mere name, upon which all foreign nations
should trample, and wild Irishmen dance war dances, and Americans
expectorate, then Mr. Gladstone would be seen in his true colours. While
this was going on, old Mrs. Wynn sat in her easy-chair and shook her
head. She declared always that she was no politician. And young Walter
Methven, attracted by the sudden quickening of the conversation which
naturally attended the introduction of this subject, came forward, ready
in the vein of opposition which was always his favourite attitude.

"Mr. Gladstone must be a very great man," he said. "I hear it is a sign
of being in society when you foam at the mouth at the sound of his
name."

"You young fellows think it fine to be on the popular side; but wait
till you are my age," cried one of the eager speakers. "It will not
matter much to me. There will be peace in my days." "But wait," cried
another, "and see how you will like it when everything topples down
together, the crown and the state, and the aristocracy, and public
credit, and national honour, and property, and the constitution,
and----"

So many anxious and alarmed politicians here spoke together that the
general voice became inarticulate, and Walter Methven, representing the
opposition, was at liberty to laugh.

"Come one, come all!" he cried, backed up by the arm of the sofa, upon
which Mrs. Wynn sat shaking her head. "It would be a fine thing for me
and all the other proletarians. Something would surely fall our way."

His mother watched him, standing up against the sofa, confronting them
all, with her usual exasperated and angry affection. She thought, as she
looked at him, that there was nothing he was not fit for. He was clever
enough for Parliament; he might have been prime minister--but he was
nothing! nothing, and likely to be nothing, doing nothing, desiring
nothing. Her eye fell on young Wynn, the rector's nephew, who had just
got a fellowship at his college, and on the doctor's son, who was just
entering into a share of his father's practice, and on Mr. Jeremy the
young banker, whose attentions fluttered any maiden to whom he might
address them. They were Walter's contemporaries, and not one of them was
worthy, she thought, to be seen by the side of her boy; but they had all
got before him in the race of life. They were something and he was
nothing. It was not much wonder if her heart was sore and angry. When
she turned round to listen civilly to something that was said to her,
her face was contracted and pale. It was more than she could bear. She
made a move to go away before any of the party was ready, and disturbed
Miss Merivale in the midst of a _tête-à-tête_, which was a thing not
easily forgiven.

Walter walked home with them in great good humour, but his mother knew
very well that he was not coming in. He was going to finish the evening
elsewhere. If he had come in would she have been able to restrain
herself? Would she not have fallen upon him, either in anger or in
grief, holding up to him the examples of young Wynn and young Jeremy and
the little doctor? She knew she would not have been able to refrain, and
it was almost a relief to her, though it was another pang, when he
turned away at the door.

"I want to speak to Underwood about to-morrow," he said.

"What is there about to-morrow? Of all the people in Sloebury Captain
Underwood is the one I like least," she said. "Why must you always have
something to say to him when every one else is going to bed?"

"I am not going to bed, nor is he," said Walter lightly.

Mrs. Methven's nerves were highly strung. Miss Merivale had passed in
before them, and there was nobody to witness this little struggle, which
she knew would end in nothing, but which was inevitable. She grasped him
by the arm in her eagerness and pain.

"Oh, my boy!" she said, "come in, come in, and think of something more
than the amusement of to-morrow. Life is not all play, though you seem
to think so. For once listen to me, Walter--oh, listen to me! You cannot
go on like this. Think of all the others; all at work, every one of
them, and you doing nothing."

"Do you want me to begin to do something now," said Walter, "when you
have just told me everybody was going to bed?"

"Oh! if I were you," she cried in her excitement, "I would rest neither
night nor day. I would not let it be said that I was the last, and every
one of them before me."

Walter shook himself free of her detaining hold. "Am I to be a dustman,
or a scavenger, or--what?" he said, contemptuously. "I know no other
trades that are followed at this hour."

Mrs. Methven had reached the point at which a woman has much ado not to
cry in the sense of impotence and exasperation which such an argument
brings. "It is better to do anything than to do nothing," she cried,
turning away from him and hastening in at the open door.

He paused a moment, as if doubtful what to do; there was something in
her hasty withdrawal which for an instant disposed him to follow, and
she paused breathless, with a kind of hope, in the half-light of the
little hall; but the next moment his footsteps sounded clear and quick
on the pavement, going away. Mrs. Methven waited until they were almost
out of hearing before she closed the door. Angry, baffled, helpless,
what could she do? She wiped a hot tear from the corner of her eye
before she went into the drawing-room, where her companion, always on
the alert, had already turned up the light of the lamp, throwing an
undesired illumination upon her face, flushed and troubled from this
brief controversy.

"I thought you were never coming in," said Miss Merivale, "and that
open door sends a draught all through the house."

"Walter detained me for a moment to explain some arrangements he has to
make for to-morrow," Mrs. Methven said with dignity. "He likes to keep
me _au courant_ of his proceedings."

Miss Merivale was absolutely silenced by this sublime assumption,
notwithstanding the flush of resentment, the glimmer of moisture in the
mother's eye.




CHAPTER II.


Walter walked along the quiet, almost deserted street with a hasty step
and a still hastier rush of disagreeable thoughts. There was, he felt,
an advantage in being angry, in the sensation of indignant resistance to
a petty tyranny. For a long time past he had taken refuge in this from
every touch of conscience and sense of time lost and opportunities
neglected. He was no genius, but he was not so dull as not to know that
his life was an entirely unsatisfactory one, and himself in the wrong
altogether; everything rotten in the state of his existence, and a great
deal that must be set right one time or another in all his habits and
ways. The misfortune was that it was so much easier to put off this
process till to-morrow than to begin it to-day. He had never been roused
out of the boyish condition of mind in which a certain resistance to
authority was natural, and opposition to maternal rule and law a sort of
proof of superiority and independence. Had this been put into words, and
placed before him as the motive of much that he did, no one would have
coloured more angrily or resented more hotly the suggestion; and yet in
the bottom of his heart he would have known it to be true. All through
his unoccupied days he carried with him the sense of folly, the
consciousness that he could not justify to himself the course he was
pursuing. The daily necessity of justifying it to another was almost the
sole thing that silenced his conscience. His mother, who kept "nagging"
day after day, who was never satisfied, whose appeals he sometimes
thought theatrical, and her passion got up, was his sole defence against
that self-dissatisfaction which is the severest of all criticisms. If
she would but let him alone, leave him to his own initiative, and not
perpetually endeavour to force a change which to be effectual, as all
authorities agreed, must come of itself! He was quite conscious of the
inadequacy of this argument, and in his heart felt that it was a poor
thing to take advantage of it; but yet, on the surface of his mind, put
it forward and made a bulwark of it against his own conscience. He did
so now as he hurried along, in all the heat that follows a personal
encounter. If she would but let him alone! But he could not move a step
anywhere, could not make an engagement, could not step into a friend's
rooms, as he was going to do now, without her interference. The
relations of a parent to an only child are not the same as those that
exist between a father and mother and the different members of a large
family. It has been usual to consider them in one particular light as
implying the closest union and mutual devotion. But there is another
point of view in which to consider the question. They are so near to
each other, and the relationship so close, that there is a possibility
of opposition and contrariety more trying, more absorbing, than any
other except that between husband and wife. A young son does not always
see the necessity of devotion to a mother who is not very old, who has
still many sources of pleasure apart from himself, and who is not
capable, perhaps, on her side, of the undiscriminating worship which is
grandmotherly, and implies a certain weakness and dimness of perception
in the fond eyes that see everything in a rosy, ideal light. This fond
delusion is often in its way a moral agent, obliging the object of it to
fulfil what is expected of him, and reward the full and perfect trust
which is given so unhesitatingly. But in this case it was not possible.
The young man thought, or persuaded himself, that his mother's vexatious
watch over him, and what he called her constant suspicion and doubt of
him, had given him a reason for the disgust and impatience with which he
turned from her control. He pictured to himself the difference which a
father's larger, more generous sway would have made in him; to that he
would have answered, he thought, like a ship to its helm, like an army
to its general. But this petty rule, this perpetual fault-finding,
raised up every faculty in opposition. Even when he meant the best, her
words of warning, her reminders of duty, were enough to set him all
wrong again. He thought, as a bad husband often thinks when he is
conscious of the world's disapproval, that it was her complaints that
were the cause. And when he was reminded by others, well-meaning but
injudicious, of all he owed to his mother, his mind rose yet more
strongly in opposition, his spirit refused the claim. This is a very
different picture from that of the widow's son whose earliest
inspiration is his sense of duty to his mother, and adoring gratitude
for her care and love--but it is perhaps as true a one. A young man may
be placed in an unfair position by the excessive claim made upon his
heart and conscience in this way, and so Walter felt it. He might have
given all that, and more, if nothing had been asked of him; but when he
was expected to feel so much, he felt himself half justified in feeling
nothing. Thus the situation had become one of strained and continual
opposition. It was a kind of duel, in which the younger combatant at
least--the assailed person, whose free-will and independence were
hampered by such perpetual requirements--never yielded a step. The other
might do so, by turns throwing up her arms altogether, but not he.

It was with this feeling strong in his mind, and affecting his temper as
nothing else does to such a degree, that he hastened along the street
towards the rooms occupied by Captain Underwood, a personage whom the
ladies of Sloebury were unanimous in disliking. Nobody knew exactly
where it was that he got his military title. He did not belong to any
regiment in her Majesty's service. He had not even the humble claim of a
militia officer; yet nobody dared say that there was anything fictitious
about him, or stigmatise the captain as an impostor. Other captains and
colonels and men-at-arms of undoubted character supported his claims; he
belonged to one or two well-known clubs. An angry woman would sometimes
fling an insult at him when her husband or son came home penniless after
an evening in his company, wondering what they could see in an
under-bred fellow who was no more a captain (she would say in her wrath)
than she was; but of these assertions there was no proof, and the
vehemence of them naturally made the captain's partisans more and more
eager in his favour. He had not been above six months in Sloebury, but
everybody knew him. There was scarcely an evening in which half-a-dozen
men did not congregate in his rooms, drawn together by that strange
attraction which makes people meet who do not care in the least for each
other's company, nor have anything to say to each other, yet are
possibly less vacant in society than when alone, or find the murmur of
many voices, the smoke of many cigars, exhilarating and agreeable. It
was not every evening that the cards were produced. The captain was
wary; he frightened nobody; he did not wish to give occasion to the
tremors of the ladies, whom he would have conciliated even, if he had
been able; but there are men against whom the instinct of all women
rises, as there are women from whom all men turn. It was only now and
then that he permitted play. He spoke indeed strongly against it on many
occasions. "What do you want with cards?" he would say. "A good cigar
and a friend to talk to ought to be enough for any man." But twice or
thrice in a week his scruples would give way. He was a tall, well-formed
man, of an uncertain age, with burning hazel eyes, and a scar on his
forehead got in that mysterious service to which now and then he made
allusion, and which his friends concluded must have been in some foreign
legion, or with Garibaldi, or some other irregular warfare. There were
some who thought him a man, old for his age, of thirty-five, and some
who, concluding him young for his age, and well preserved, credited him
with twenty years more; but thirty-five or fifty-five, whichever it was,
he was erect and strong, and well set up, and possessed an amount of
experience and apparent knowledge of the world, at which the striplings
of Sloebury admired and wondered, and which even the older men
respected, as men in the country respect the mention of great names and
incidents that have become historical. He had a way of recommending
himself even to the serious, and would now and then break forth, as if
reluctantly, into an account of some instance of faith or patience on
the battlefield or the hospital which made even the rector declare that
to consider Underwood as an irreligious man was both unjust and unkind.
So strong was the prejudice of the women, however, that Mrs. Wynn,
always charitable, and whose silent protest was generally only made when
the absent were blamed, shook her head at this testimony borne in favour
of the Captain. She had no son to be led away, and her husband it need
not be said, considering his position, was invulnerable; but with all
her charity she could not believe in the religion of Captain Underwood.
His rooms were very nice rooms in the best street in Sloebury, and if
his society was what is called "mixed," yet the best people were
occasionally to be met there, as well as those who were not the best.

There was a little stir in the company when Walter entered. To tell the
truth, notwithstanding the wild mirth and dissipation which the ladies
believed to go on in Captain Underwood's rooms, the society assembled
there was at the moment dull and in want of a sensation. There had not
been anything said for the course of two minutes at least. There was no
play going on, and the solemn puff of smoke from one pair of lips after
another would have been the height of monotony had it not been the
wildest fun and gratification. The men in the room took pipes and cigars
out of their mouths to welcome the new-comer. "Hallo, Walter!" they all
said in different tones; for in Sloebury the use of Christian names was
universal, everybody having known everybody else since the moment of
their birth.

"Here comes Methven," said the owner of the rooms (it was one of his
charms, in the eyes of the younger men, that he was not addicted to this
familiarity), "in the odour of sanctity. It will do us all good to have
an account of the rector's party. How did you leave the old ladies, my
excellent boy?"

"Stole away like the fox, by Jove," said the hunting man, who was the
pride of Sloebury.

"More like the mouse with the old cats after it," said another wit.

Now Walter had come in among them strong in his sense of right and in
his sense of wrong, feeling himself at the same moment a sorry fool and
an injured hero, a sufferer for the rights of man; and it would have
been of great use to him in both these respects to have felt himself
step into a superior atmosphere, into the heat of a political
discussion, or even into noisy amusement, or the passion of
play--anything which would rouse the spirits and energies, and show the
action of a larger life. But to feel his own arrival a sort of godsend
in the dulness, and to hear nothing but the heavy puff of all the smoke,
and the very poor wit with which he was received, was sadly
disconcerting, and made him more and more angry with himself and the
circumstances which would give him no sort of support or comfort.

"The old ladies," he said, "were rather more lively than you fellows.
You look as if you had all been poisoned in your wine, like the men in
the opera, and expected the wall to open and the monks and the coffins
to come in."

"I knew that Methven would bring us some excellent lesson," said Captain
Underwood. "Remember that we have all to die. Think, my friends, upon
your latter end."

"Jump up here and give us a sermon, Wat."

"Don't tease him, he's dangerous."

"The old ladies have been too much for him."

This went on till Walter had settled down into his place, and lighted
his pipe like the rest. He looked upon them with disenchanted eyes; not
that he had ever entertained any very exalted opinion of his company;
but to-night he was out of sympathy with all his surroundings, and he
felt it almost a personal offence that there should be so little to
attract and excite in this manly circle which thought so much more of
itself than of any other, and was so scornful of the old ladies who
after all were not old ladies: but the graver members of the community
in general, with an ornamental adjunct of young womankind. On ordinary
occasions no doubt Walter would have chimed in with the rest, but
to-night he was dissatisfied and miserable, not sure of any sensation in
particular, but one of scorn and distaste for his surroundings. He would
have felt this in almost any conceivable case, but in the midst of this
poor jesting and would-be wit, the effect was doubled. Was it worth
while for this to waste his time, to offend the opinion of all his
friends? Such thoughts must always come in similar circumstances. Even
in the most brilliant revelry there will be a pause, a survey of the
position, a sense, however unwilling that the game is not worth the
candle. But here! They were all as dull as ditch water, he said to
himself. Separately there was scarcely one whom he would have selected
as an agreeable companion, and was it possible by joining many dulnesses
together to produce a brilliant result? There was no doubt that Walter's
judgment was jaundiced that evening; for he was not by any means so
contemptuous of his friends on ordinary occasions; but he had been eager
to find an excuse for himself, to be able to say that here was real life
and genial society in place of the affected solemnity of the proper
people. When he found himself unable to do this, he was struck as by a
personal grievance, and sat moody and abstracted, bringing a chill upon
everybody, till one by one the boon companions strolled away.

"A pretty set of fellows to talk of dulness," he cried, with a little
burst, "as if they were not dull beyond all description themselves."

"Come, Methven, you are out of temper," said Captain Underwood. "They
are good fellows enough when you are in the vein for them. Something has
put you out of joint."

"Nothing at all," cried Walter, "except the sight of you all sitting as
solemn as owls pretending to enjoy yourselves. At the rectory one yawned
indeed, it was the genius of the place--but to hear all those dull dogs
laughing at that, as if they were not a few degrees worse! Is there
nothing but dulness in life? Is everything the same--one way or
another--and nothing to show for it all, when it is over, but
tediousness and discontent?"

Underwood looked at him keenly with his fiery eyes.

"So you've come to that already, have you?" he said. "I thought you were
too young and foolish."

"I am not so young as not to know that I am behaving like an idiot,"
Walter said. Perhaps he had a little hope of being contradicted and
brought back to his own esteem.

But instead of this, Captain Underwood only looked at him again and
laughed.

"I know," he said: "the conscience has its tremors, especially after an
evening at the rectory. You see how well respectability looks, how
comfortable it is."

"I do nothing of the sort," Walter cried indignantly. "I see how dull
you are, you people who scoff at respectability, and I begin to wonder
whether it is not better to be dull and thrive than to be dull and
perish. They seem much the same thing so far as enjoyment goes."

"You want excitement," said the other carelessly. "I allow there is not
much of that here."

"I want something," cried Walter. "Cards even are better than nothing. I
want to feel that I have blood in my veins."

"My dear boy, all that is easily explained. You want money. Money is the
thing that mounts the blood in the veins. With money you can have as
much excitement, as much movement as you like. Let people say what they
please, there is nothing else that does it," said the man of experience.
He took a choice cigar leisurely from his case as he spoke. "A bit of a
country town like this, what can you expect from it? There is no go in
them. They risk a shilling, and go away frightened if they lose. If they
don't go to church on Sunday they feel all the remorse of a villain in a
play. It's all petty here--everything's petty, both the vices and the
virtues. I don't wonder you find it slow. What I find it, I needn't
say."

"Why do you stop here, then?" said Walter, not unnaturally, with a
momentary stare of surprise. Then he resumed, being full of his own
subject. "I know I'm an ass," he said. "I loaf about here doing nothing
when I ought to be at work. I don't know why I do it; but neither do I
know how to get out of it. You, that's quite another thing. You have no
call to stay. I wonder you do: why do you? If I were as free as you, I
should be off--before another day."

"Come along then," said Underwood, good-humouredly. "I'll go if you'll
go."

At this Walter shook his head.

"I have no money you know. I ought to be in an office or doing
something. I can't go off to shoot here or fish there, like you."

"By and by--by and by. You have time enough to wait."

Walter gave him a look of surprise.

"There is nothing to wait for," he said. "Is that why you have said so
many things to me about seeing life? I have nothing. We've got no money
in the family. I may wait till doomsday, but it will do nothing for me."

"Don't be too sure of that," said Underwood. "Oh, you needn't devour me
with your eyes. I know nothing of your family affairs. I suppose of
course that by and by, in the course of nature----"

"You mean," said Walter, turning pale, "when my mother dies. No, I'm not
such a wretched cad as that: if I didn't know I should get next to
nothing then, I----" (His conscience nearly tripped this young man up,
running into his way so hurriedly that he caught his foot unawares.)
Then he stopped and grew red, staring at his companion. "Most of what
she has dies with her, if that's what you're thinking of. There is
nothing in that to build upon. And I'm glad of it," the young man cried.

"I beg your pardon, Methven," said the other. "But it needn't be that;
there are other ways of getting rich."

"I don't know any of them, unless by work: and how am I to work? It is
so easy to speak. What can I work at? and where am I to get it?--there
is the question. I hear enough on that subject--as if I were a tailor
or a shoemaker that could find something to do at any corner. There is
no reason in it," the young man said, so hotly, and with such a flush of
resentful obstinacy, that the fervour of his speech betrayed him. He was
like a man who had outrun himself, and paused, out of breath.

"You'll see; something will turn up," said Underwood, with a laugh.

"What can turn up?--nothing. Suppose I go to New Zealand and come back
at fifty with my fortune made--Fifty's just the age, isn't it, to begin
to enjoy yourself," cried Walter, scornfully; "when you have not a tooth
left, nor a faculty perfect?" He was so young that the half-century
appeared to him like the age of Methusaleh, and men who lived to that
period as having outlived all that is worth living for. His mentor
laughed a little uneasily, as if he had been touched by this chance
shot.

"It is not such a terrible age after all," he said. "A man can still
enjoy himself when he is fifty; but I grant you that at twenty-four it's
a long time to wait for your pleasure. However, let us hope something
will turn up before then. Supposing, for the sake of argument, you were
to come in to your fortune more speedily, I wonder what you would do
with it--eh? you are such a terrible fellow for excitement. The turf?"

"All that is folly," said Walter, getting up abruptly. "Nothing more,
thanks. I am coming in to no fortune. And you don't understand me a
bit," he said, turning at the door of the room, to look back upon the
scene where he had himself spent so many hours, made piquant by a sense
of that wrongdoing which supplies excitement when other motives fail.
The chairs standing about as their occupants had thrust them away from
the table, the empty glasses upon it, the disorder of the room, struck
him with a certain sense of disgust. It was a room intended by nature to
be orderly and sober, with heavy country-town furniture, and nothing
about it that could throw any grace on disarray. The master of the place
stood against the table swaying a somewhat heavy figure over it, and
gazing at the young man with his fiery eyes. Walter's rudeness did not
please him, any more than his abrupt withdrawal.

"Don't be too sure of that," he said, with an effort to retain his
good-humoured aspect. "If I don't understand you, I should like to know
who does? and when that fortune comes, you will remember what I say."

"Pshaw!" Walter cried, impatiently turning away. A nod of his head was
all the good-night he gave. He hurried down as he had hurried up, still
as little contented, as full of dissatisfaction as when he came. This
man who thought he understood him, who intended to influence him,
revolted the young man's uneasy sense of independence, as much as did
the bond of more lawful authority. Did Underwood, _too_, think him a
child not able to guide himself? It was very late by this time, and the
streets very silent. He walked quickly home through the wintry darkness
of November, with a mind as thoroughly out of tune as it is possible to
imagine. He had gone to Underwood's in the hot impulse of opposition,
with the hope of getting rid temporarily, at least, of the struggle
within him; but he had not got rid of it. The dull jokes of the
assembled company had only made the raging of the inward storm more
sensible, and the jaunty and presumptuous misconception with which his
host received his involuntary confidences afterwards, had aggravated
instead of soothing his mind. Indeed, Underwood's pretence at knowing
all about it, his guesses and attempts to sound his companion's mind,
and the blundering interpretation of it into which he stumbled, filled
Walter with double indignation and disgust. This man too he had thought
much of, and expected superior intelligence from--and all that he had to
say was an idiotic anticipation of some miraculous coming into a fortune
which Walter was aware was as likely to happen to the beggar on the
streets as to himself. He had been angry with nature and his mother when
he left her door; he was angry with everybody when he returned to it,
though his chief anger of all, and the root of all the others, was that
anger with himself, which burnt within his veins, and which is the
hardest of all others to quench out.




CHAPTER III.


Walter was very late next morning as he had been very late at night. The
ladies had breakfasted long before, and there was a look of reproach in
the very table-cloth left there so much after the usual time, and
scrupulously cleared of everything that the others had used, and
arranged at one end, with the dish kept hot for him, and the small
teapot just big enough for one, which was a sermon in itself. His mother
was seated by the fire with her weekly books, which she was adding up.
She said scarcely anything to him, except the morning greeting, filling
out his tea with a gravity which was all the more crushing that there
was nothing in it to object to, nothing to resent. Adding up accounts of
itself is not cheerful work; but naturally the young man resented this
seriousness all the more because he had no right to do so. It was
intolerable, he felt, to sit and eat in presence of that silent figure
partly turned away from him, jotting down the different amounts on a bit
of paper, and absorbed in that occupation as if unconscious of his
presence. Even scolding was better than this; Walter was perfectly
conscious of all it was in her power to say. He knew by heart her
remonstrances and appeals. But he disliked the silence more than all. He
longed to take her by the shoulders, and cry, "What is it? What have you
got to say to me? What do you mean by sitting there like a stone figure,
and _meaning_ it all the same!" He did not do this, knowing it would be
foolish, and gave his constant antagonist a certain advantage; but he
longed to get rid of some of his own exasperation by such an act. It was
with a kind of force over himself that he ate his breakfast, going
through all the forms, prolonging it to the utmost of his power, helping
himself with deliberate solemnity in defiance of the spectator, who
seemed so absorbed in her own occupation, but was, he felt sure,
watching his every movement. It was not, however, until he had come to
an end of his prolonged meal and of his newspaper, that his mother
spoke.

"Do you think," she said, "that it would be possible for you to write
that letter to Mr. Milnathort of which I have spoken so often, to-day?"

"Oh, quite possible," said Walter, carelessly.

"Will you do it, then? It seems to me very important to your interests.
Will you really do it, and do it to-day?"

"I'll see about it," Walter said.

"I don't ask you to see about it. It is nothing very difficult. I ask
you to do it at once--to-day."

He gazed at her for a moment with an angry obstinacy.

"I see no particular occasion for all this haste. It has stood over a
good many days. Why should you insist so upon it now?"

"Every day that it has been put off has been a mistake. It should have
been done at once," Mrs. Methven said.

"I'll see about it," he said carelessly; and he went out of the room
with a sense of having exasperated her as usual, which was almost
pleasant.

At the bottom of his heart he meant to do what his mother had asked of
him: but he would not betray his good intentions. He preferred to look
hostile even when he was in the mind to be obedient. He went away to the
little sitting-room which was appropriated to him, where his pipes
adorned the mantelpiece, and sat down to consider the situation. To
write a letter was not a great thing to do, and he fully meant to do it;
but after he had mused a little angrily upon the want of perception
which made his mother adopt that cold and hectoring tone, when if she
had asked him gently he would have done it in a minute, he put forth his
hand and drew a book towards him. It was not either a new or an
entertaining book, but it secured his idle attention until he suddenly
remembered that it was time to go out. The letter was not written, but
what did that matter? The post did not go out till the afternoon, and
there was plenty of time between that time and this to write
half-a-dozen letters. It would do very well, he thought, when he came in
for lunch. So he threw down the book and got his hat and went out.

Mrs. Methven, who was on the watch, hearing his every movement, came
into his room after he was gone, and looked round with eager eyes to see
if the letter was written, if there was any trace of it. Perhaps he had
taken it out with him to post it, she thought: and though it was
injurious to her that she should not know something more about a piece
of business in which he was not the sole person concerned, yet it gave
her a sort of relief to think that so much at least he had done. She
went back to her books with an easier mind. She was far from being a
rich woman, but her son had known none of her little difficulties, her
efforts to make ends meet. She had thought it wrong to trouble his
childhood with such confidences, and he had grown up thinking nothing on
the subject, without any particular knowledge of, or interest in, her
affairs, taking everything for granted. It was her own fault, she said
to herself, and so it was to some extent. She would sometimes think that
if she had it to do over again she would change all that. How often do
we think this, and with what bitter regret, in respect to the children
whom people speak of as wax in our hands, till we suddenly wake up and
find them iron! She had kept her difficulties out of Walter's way, and
instead of being grateful to her for so doing, he was simply
indifferent, neither inquiring nor caring to know. Her own doing! It was
easier to herself, yet bitter beyond telling, to acknowledge it to be
so. Just at this time, when Christmas was approaching, the ends took a
great deal of tugging and coaxing to bring them together. A few of
Walter's bills had come in unexpectedly, putting her poor balance
altogether wrong. Miss Merivale contributed a little, but only a little,
to the housekeeping; for Mrs. Methven was both proud and liberal, and
understood giving better than receiving. She went back to the
dining-room, where all her books lay upon the table, near the fire. Her
reckoning had advanced much since she had begun it, with Walter sitting
at breakfast. Her faculties had been all absorbed in him and what he was
doing. Now she addressed herself to her accounts with a strenuous
effort. It is hard work to balance a small sum of money against a large
number of bills, to settle how to divide it so as that everybody shall
have something, and the mouths of hungry creditors be stopped. Perhaps
we might say that this was one of the fine arts--so many pounds here, so
many there, keeping credit afloat, and the wolf of debt from the door.
Mrs. Methven was skilled in it. She went to this work, feeling all its
difficulty and burden: yet, with a little relief, not because she saw
any way out of her difficulties, but because Walter had written that
letter. It was always something done, she thought, in her simplicity,
and something might come of it, some way in which he could get the means
of exercising his faculties, perhaps of distinguishing himself even
yet.

Walter for his part strolled away through the little town in his usual
easy way. It was a fine, bright, winterly morning, not cold, yet cold
enough to make brisk walking pleasant, and stir the blood in young
veins. There was no football going on, nor any special amusement. He
could not afford to hunt, and the only active winter exercise which he
could attain was limited to this game--of which there was a good deal at
Sloebury--and skating, when it pleased Providence to send ice, which was
too seldom. He looked in upon one or two of his cronies, and played a
game of billiards, and hung about the High Street to see what was going
on. There was nothing particular going on, but the air was fresh, and
the sun shining, and a little pleasant movement about, much more
agreeable at least than sitting in a stuffy little room writing a
troublesome letter which he felt sure would not do the least good.
Finally, he met Captain Underwood, who regarded him with a look which
Walter would have called anxious had he been able to imagine any
possible reason why Underwood should entertain any anxiety on his
account.

"Well! any news?" the captain cried.

"News! What news should there be in this dead-alive place?" Walter said.

The other looked at him keenly as if to see whether he was quite
sincere, and then said, "Come and have some lunch."

He was free of all the best resorts in Sloebury, this mysterious
man. He belonged to the club, he was greatly at his ease in the
hotel--everything was open to him. Walter, who had but little money
of his own, and could not quite cut the figure he wished, was not
displeased to be thus exhibited as the captain's foremost ally.

"I thought you might have come into that fortune, you are looking so
spruce," the captain said, and laughed. But though he laughed he kept an
eye on the young man as if the pleasantry meant more than appeared.
Walter felt a momentary irritation with this, which seemed to him a very
bad joke; but he went with the captain all the same, not without a
recollection of the table at home, at which, after waiting three
quarters of an hour or so, and watching at the window for his coming,
the ladies would at last sit down. But he was not a child to be forced
to attendance at every meal, he said to himself. The captain's
attentions to him were great, and it was a very nice little meal that
they had together.

"I expect you to do great things for me when you come into your fortune.
You had better engage me at once as your guide, philosopher, and
friend," he said, with a laugh. "Of course you will quit Sloebury, and
make yourself free of all this bondage."

"Oh, of course," said Walter, humouring the joke, though it was so bad a
one in every way.

He could not quarrel with his host at his own table, and perhaps after
all it was more dignified to take it with good humour.

"You must not go in for mere expense," the captain said; "you must make
it pay. I can put you up to a thing or two. You must not go into the
world like a pigeon to be plucked. It would effect my personal honour if
a pupil of mine--for I consider you as a pupil of mine, Methven, I think
I have imparted to you a thing or two. You are not quite the simpleton
you used to be, do you think you are?"

Walter received this with great gravity, though he tried to look as if
he were not offended.

"Was I a simpleton?" he said. "I suppose in one's own case one never
sees."

"Were you a simpleton!" said the other, with a laugh, and then he
stopped himself, always keenly watching the young man's face, and
perceiving that he was going too far. "But I flatter myself you could
hold your own at whist with any man now," the captain said.

This pleased the young man; his gravity unbended a little; there was a
visible relaxation of the corners of his mouth. To be praised is always
agreeable. Moral applause, indeed, may be taken with composure, but who
could hear himself applauded for his whist-playing without an
exhilaration of the heart? He said, with satisfaction, "I always was
pretty good at games," at which his instructor laughed again, almost too
much for perfect good breeding.

"I like to have young fellows like you to deal with," he said, "fellows
with a little spirit, that are born for better things. Your
country-town young man is as fretful and frightened when he loses a few
shillings as if it were thousands. But that's one of the reasons why I
feel you're born to luck, my boy. I know a man of liberal breeding
whenever I see him, he is not frightened about a nothing. That's one of
the things I like in you, Methven. You deserve a fortune, and you
deserve to have me for your guide, philosopher, and friend."

All this was said by way of joke; but it was strange to see the steady
watch which he kept on the young man's face. One would have said a
person of importance whom Underwood meant to try his strength with, but
guardedly, without going too far, and even on whom he was somehow
dependent, anxious to make a good impression. Walter, who knew his own
favour to be absolutely without importance, and that Underwood above
all, his host and frequent entertainer, could be under no possible
delusion on the subject, was puzzled, yet flattered, feeling that only
some excellence on his part, undiscovered by any of his other
acquaintances, could account for this. So experienced a person could
have "no motive" in thus paying court to a penniless and prospectless
youth. Walter was perplexed, but he was gratified too. He had not seen
many of the captain's kind; nobody who knew so many people or who was so
much at his ease with the world. Admiration of this vast acquaintance,
and of the familiarity with which the captain treated things and people
of which others spoke with bated breath, had varied in his mind with a
fluctuating sense that Underwood was not exactly so elevated a person as
he professed to be, and even that there were occasional vulgarities in
this man of the world. Walter felt these, but in his ignorance
represented to himself that perhaps they were right enough, and only
seemed vulgar to him who knew no better. And to-day there is no doubt he
was somewhat intoxicated by this flattery. It must be disinterested, for
what could he do for anybody? He confided to the captain more than he
had ever done before of his own position. He described how he was being
urged to write to old Milnathort. "He is an old lawyer in Scotland--what
they call a writer--and it is supposed he might be induced to take me
into his office, for the sake of old associations. I don't know what the
associations are, but the position does not smile upon me," Walter said.

"Your family then is a Scotch family?" said the captain with a nod of
approval. "I thought as much."

"I don't know that I've got a family," said Walter.

"On the contrary, Methven is a very good name. There are half-a-dozen
baronets at least, and a peer--you must have heard of him, Lord
Erradeen."

"Oh yes, I've heard of him," Walter said with a conscious look.

If he had been more in the world he would have said "he is a cousin of
mine," but he was aware that the strain of kindred was very far off, and
he was at once too shy and too proud to claim it. His companion waited
apparently for the disclosure, then finding it did not come opened the
way.

"If he's a relation of yours, it's to him you ought to write; very
likely he would do something for you. They are a curious family. I've
had occasion to know something about them."

"I think you know everybody, Underwood."

"Well, I have knocked about the world a great deal; in that way one
comes across a great many people. I saw a good deal of the present lord
at one time. He was a very queer man--they are all queer. If you are one
of them you'll have to bear your share in it. There is a mysterious
house they have--You would think I was an idiot if I told you half the
stories I have heard----"

"About the Erradeens?"

"About everybody," said the captain evasively. "There is scarcely a
family, that, if you go right into it, has not something curious about
them. We all have; but those that last and continue keep it on record. I
could tell you the wildest tales about So-and-so and So-and-so, very
ordinary people to look at, but with stories that would make your hair
stand on end."

"We have nothing to do with things of that sort. My people have always
been straightforward and above-board."

"For as much as you know, perhaps; but go back three or four generations
and how can you tell? We have all of us ancestors that perhaps were not
much to brag of."

Walter caught Underwood's eye as he said this, and perhaps there was a
twinkle in it, for he laughed.

"It is something," he said, "to have ancestors at all."

"If they were the greatest blackguards in the world," the captain said
with a responsive laugh, "that's what I think. You don't want any more
of my revelations? Well, never mind, probably I shall have you coming to
me some of these days quite humbly to beg for more information. You are
not cut out for an attorney's office. It is very virtuous, of course, to
give yourself up to work and turn your back upon life."

"Virtue be hanged," said Walter, with some excitement, "it is not
virtue, but necessity, which I take to be the very opposite. I know I'm
wasting my time, but I mean to turn over a new leaf. And as the first
evidence of that, as soon as I go home I shall write to old Milnathort."

"Not to-day," said Underwood, looking at his watch; "the post has gone;
twenty-four hours more to think about it will do you no harm."

Walter started to his feet, and it was with a real pang that he saw how
the opportunity had escaped him, and his intention in spite of himself
been balked; a flush of shame came over his face. He felt that, if never
before, here was a genuine occasion for blame. To be sure, the same
thing had happened often enough before, but he had never perhaps so
fully intended to do what was required of him. He sat down again with a
muttered curse at himself and his own folly. There was nothing to be
said for him. He had meant to turn over a new leaf, and yet this day was
just like the last. The thought made his heart sick for the moment. But
what was the use of making a fuss and betraying himself to a stranger?
He sat down again, with a self-disgust which made him glad to escape
from his own company. Underwood's talk might be shallow enough, perhaps
his pretence at knowledge was not very well founded, but he was safer
company than conscience, and that burning and miserable sense of moral
impotence which is almost worse than the more tragic stings of
conscience. To find out that your resolution is worth nothing, after you
have put yourself to the trouble of making it, and that habit is more
strong than any motive, is not a pleasant thing to think of. Better let
the captain talk about Lord Erradeen, or any other lord in the peerage.
Underwood, being encouraged with a few questions, talked very largely on
this subject. He gave the young man many pieces of information, which
indeed he could have got in Debrett if he had been anxious on the
subject; and as the afternoon wore on they strolled out again for
another promenade up and down the more populous parts of Sloebury, and
there fell in with other idlers like themselves; and when the twilight
yielded to the more cheerful light of the lamps, betook themselves to
whist, which was sometimes played in the captain's rooms at that immoral
hour. Sloebury, even the most advanced portion of it, had been
horrified at the thought of whist before dinner when the captain first
suggested it, but that innocent alarm had long since melted away. There
was nothing dangerous about it, no stakes which any one could be hurt by
losing. When Walter, warned by the breaking up of the party that it was
the hour for dinner, took his way home also, he was the winner of a
sixpence or two, and no more: there had been nothing wrong in the play.
But when he turned the corner of Underwood's street and found himself
with the wind in his face on his way home, the revulsion of feeling from
something like gaiety to a rush of disagreeable anticipations, a crowd
of uncomfortable thoughts, was pitiful. In spite of all our boastings of
home and home influence, how many experience this change the moment they
turn their face in the direction of that centre where it is conventional
to suppose all comfort and shelter is! There is a chill, an abandonment
of pleasant sensations, a preparation for those that are not pleasant.
Walter foresaw what he would find there with an impatience and
resentment which were almost intolerable. Behind the curtain, between
the laths of the Venetian blind, his mother would be secretly on the
outlook watching for his return; perhaps even she had stolen quietly to
the door, and, sheltered in the darkness of the porch, was looking out;
or, if not that, the maid who opened the door would look reproachfully
at him, and ask if he was going to dress, or if she might serve the
dinner at once: it must have been waiting already nearly half an hour.
He went on very quickly, but his thoughts lingered and struggled with
the strong disinclination that possessed him. How much he would have
given not to go home at all! how little pleasure he expected when he got
there! His mother most likely would be silent, pale with anger, saying
little, while Cousin Sophia would get up a little conversation. She
would talk lightly about anything that might have been happening, and
Walter would perhaps exert himself to give Sophia back her own, and show
his mother that he cared nothing about her displeasure. And then when
dinner was over, he would hurry out again, glad to be released. Home:
this was what it had come to be: and nothing could mend it so far as
either mother or son could see. Oh, terrible incompatibility,
unapproachableness of one soul to another! To think that they should be
so near, yet so far away. Even in the case of husband and wife the
severance is scarcely so terrible; for they have come towards each other
out of different spheres, and if they do not amalgamate, there are many
secondary causes that may be blamed, differences of nature and training
and thought. But a mother with her child, whom she has brought up, whose
first opinions she has implanted, who ought naturally to be influenced
by her ways of thinking, and even by prejudices and superstitions in
favour of her way! It was not, however, this view of the question which
moved the young man. It was the fact of his own bondage, the compulsion
he was under to return to dinner, to give some partial obedience to the
rules of the house, and to confess that he had not written that letter
to Mr. Milnathort.

When he came in sight of the house, however, he became aware insensibly,
he could scarcely tell how, of some change in its aspect: what was it?
It was lighted up in the most unusual way. The window of the spare room
was shining not only with candlelight, but with firelight, his own room
was lighted up; the door was standing open, throwing out a warm flood of
light into the street, and in the centre of this light stood Mrs.
Methven with her white shawl over her head, not at all concealing
herself, gazing anxiously in the direction from which he was coming.

"I think I will send for him," he heard her say; "he has, very likely,
stepped into Captain Underwood's, and he is apt to meet friends there
who will not let him go."

Her voice was soft--there was no blame in it, though she was anxious.
She was speaking to some one behind her, a figure in a great coat.
Walter was in the shadow and invisible. He paused in his surprise to
listen.

"I must get away by the last train," he heard the voice of the muffled
figure say somewhat pettishly.

"Oh, there is plenty of time for that," cried his mother; and then she
gave a little cry of pleasure, and said, "And, at a good moment, here he
is!"

He came in somewhat dazzled, and much astonished, into the strong light
in the open doorway. Mrs. Methven's countenance was all radiant and
glowing with pleasure. She held out her hand to him eagerly.

"We have been looking for you," she cried; "I have had a great surprise.
Walter, this is Mr. Milnathort."

Puzzled, startled, and yet somewhat disappointed, Walter paused in the
hall, and looked at a tall old man with a face full of crotchets and
intelligence, who stood with two great coats unbuttoned, and a comforter
half unwound from his throat, under the lamp. His features were high and
thin, his eyes invisible under their deep sockets.

"Now, you will surely take off your coat, and consent to go up-stairs,
and make yourself comfortable," said Mrs. Methven, with a thrill of
excitement in her voice. "This is Walter. He has heard of you all his
life. Without any reference to the nature of your communication, he must
be glad, indeed, to make your acquaintance--"

She gave Walter a look of appeal as she spoke. He was so much surprised
that it was with difficulty he found self-possession to murmur a few
words of civility. A feeling that Mr. Milnathort must have come to look
after that letter which had never been written came in with the most
wonderfully confusing, half ludicrous effect into his mind, like one of
the inadequate motives and ineffable conclusions of a dream. Mr.
Milnathort made a stiff little bow in reply.

"I will remain till the last train. In the mean time the young gentleman
had better be informed, Mrs. Methven."

She put out her hands again. "A moment--give us a moment first."

The old lawyer stood still and looked from the mother to the son.
Perhaps to his keen eyes it was revealed that it would be well she
should have the advantage of any pleasant revelation.

"I will," he said, "madam, avail myself of your kind offer to go
up-stairs and unroll myself out of these trappings of a long journey;
and in the mean time you will, perhaps, like to tell him the news
yourself: he will like it all the better if he hears it from his
mother."

Mrs. Methven bowed her head, having, apparently, no words at her
command: and stood looking after him till he disappeared on the stairs,
following the maid, who had been waiting with a candle lighted in her
hand. When he was gone, she seized Walter hurriedly by the arm, and drew
him towards the little room, the nearest, which was his ordinary
sitting-room. Her hand grasped him with unnecessary force in her
excitement. The room was dark--he could not see her face, the only light
in it being the reflection of the lamp outside.

"Oh, Walter!" she cried; "oh, my boy! I don't know how to tell you the
news. This useless life is all over for you, and another--oh, how
different--another--God grant it happy and great, oh, God grant it!
blessed and noble!--"

Her voice choked with excitement and fast-coming tears. She drew him
towards her into her arms.

"It will take you from me--but what of that, if it makes you happy and
good? I have been no guide to you, but God will be your guide: His
leadings were all dark to me, but now I see--"

"Mother," he cried, with a strange impulse he could not understand,
putting his arm round her, "I did not write that letter: I have done
nothing I promised or meant to do. I am sick to the heart to think what
a fool and a cad I am--for the love of God tell me what it is!"




CHAPTER IV.


All Sloebury was aware next morning that something of the most
extraordinary character had happened to young Walter Methven. The rumour
even reached the club on the same evening. First the report was that he
had got a valuable appointment, at which the gentlemen shook their
heads; next that he had come into a fortune: they laughed with one
accord at this. Then, as upon a sudden gale of wind, there blew into the
smoking-room, then full of tobacco, newspapers, and men, a whisper which
made everybody turn pale. This was one reason, if not the chief, why
that evening was one of the shortest ever known at the club, which did
not indeed generally keep very late hours, but still was occupied by its
_habitués_ till ten or eleven o'clock, when the serious members would go
away, leaving only the boys, who never could have enough of it. But on
that evening even the young men cleared off about ten or so. They wanted
to know what it meant. Some of them went round to Captain Underwood's
where Walter was so often to be found, with a confidence that at least
Underwood would know; the more respectable members of society went home
to their families to spread the news, and half-a-dozen mothers at least
went to bed that night with a disagreeable recollection that they had
individually and deliberately "broken off" an incipient flirtation or
more, in which Walter had been one of the parties concerned. But the
hopeful ones said to themselves, "Lizzie has but to hold up her little
finger to bring him back." This was before the whole was known. The
young men who had hurried to Captain Underwood's were received by that
gentleman with an air of importance and of knowing more than he would
tell, which impressed their imaginations deeply. He allowed that he had
always known that there was a great deal of property, and perhaps a
title concerned, but declared that he was not at liberty to say any
more. Thus the minds of all were prepared for a great revelation; and it
is safe to say that from one end of Sloebury to the other Walter's name
was in everybody's mouth. It had been always believed that the Methvens
were people of good connections, and of later years it had been
whispered by the benevolent as a reason for Walter's inaction that he
had grand relations, who at the proper moment would certainly interfere
and set everything right for him. Others, however, were strenuous in
their denial and ridicule of this, asking, was his mother a woman to
conceal any advantages she had?--for they did not understand the kind of
pride in which Mrs. Methven was so strong. And then it was clear that
not only did the grand relations do nothing for Walter, but he did not
even have an invitation from them, and went from home only when his
mother went to the sea-side. Thus there was great doubt and wonder, and
in some quarters an inclination to treat the rumour as a canard, and to
postpone belief. At the same time everybody believed it, more or less,
at the bottom of their hearts, feeling that a thing so impossible must
be true.

But when it burst fully upon the world next morning along with the pale
November daylight, but much more startling, that Walter Methven had
succeeded as the next heir to his distant cousin, who was the head of
the family, and was now Lord Erradeen, a great potentate, with castles
in the Highlands and fat lands further south, and moors and deer forests
and everything that the heart of man could think of, the town was swept
not only by a thrill of wonder, but of emotion. Nobody was indifferent
to this extraordinary romance. Some, when they had got over the first
bewilderment, received it with delightful anticipations, as if the good
fortune which had befallen Walter was in some respects good fortune also
for themselves; whereas many others were almost angry at this sudden
elevation over their heads of one who certainly did not deserve any
better, if indeed half so well as they did. But nobody was indifferent.
It was the greatest excitement that had visited Sloebury for years--even
it might be said for generations. Lord Erradeen! it took away
everybody's breath.

Among the circle of Walter's more intimate acquaintance, the impression
made was still deeper, as may be supposed. The commotion in the mind of
the rector, who indeed was old enough to have taken it with more
placidity, was such that he hurried in from morning service without
taking off his cassock. He was a good Churchman, but not so far gone as
to walk about the world in that ecclesiastical garment.

"Can you imagine what has happened?" he said, bursting in upon Mrs.
Wynn, who was delicate and did not go to church in the winter mornings.
"Young Walter Methven, that you all made such a talk about----"

This was unfair, because she had never made any talk--being a woman who
did not talk save most sparingly. She was tempted for a moment to
forestall him by telling him she already knew, but her heart failed her,
and she only shook her head a little in protest against this calumny,
and waited smilingly for what he had to say. She could not take away
from him the pleasure of telling this wonderful piece of news.

"Why it was only the night before last he was here--most of us rather
disapproving of him, poor boy," said the rector. "Well, Lydia, that
young fellow that was a good-for-nothing, you know--doing nothing, never
exerting himself: well, my dear! the most extraordinary thing has
happened--the most wonderful piece of good fortune----"

"Don't keep me on tenterhooks, Julius; I have heard some buzzing of talk
already."

"I should think you had! the town is full of it; they tell me that
everybody you meet on the streets--Lydia!" said the rector with
solemnity, drawing close to her to make his announcement more imposing,
"that boy is no longer simple Mr. Walter Methven. He is Lord
Erradeen----"

"Lord what?" cried the old lady. It was part of her character to be a
little deaf, or rather hard of hearing, which is the prettier way of
stating the fact. It was supposed by some that this was one of the
reasons why, when any one was blamed, she always shook her head.

"Lord Er-ra-deen; but bless me, it is not the name that is so wonderful,
it is the fact. Lord Erradeen--a great personage--a man of importance.
You don't show any surprise, Lydia! and yet it is the most astonishing
incident without comparison that has happened in the parish these
hundred years."

"I wonder what his mother is thinking," Mrs. Wynn said.

"If her head is turned nobody could be surprised. Of course, like every
other mother, she thinks her son worthy of every exaltation."

"I wish she was of that sort," the old lady said.

"Every woman is of that sort," said the rector with hasty dogmatism;
"and, in one way, I am rather sorry, for it will make her feel she was
perfectly right in encouraging him, and that would be such a terrible
example for others. The young men will all take to idling----"

"But it is not the idling, but the fact that there is a peerage in the
family----"

"You can't expect," cried the rector, who was not lucid, "that boys or
women either will reason back so far as that. It will be a bad example:
and, in the mean time, it is a most astonishing fact. But you don't seem
in the least excited. I thought you would have jumped out of your
chair--out of the body almost."

"I am too rheumatic for that," said Mrs. Wynn with a smile: then, "I
wonder if she will come and tell me," the old lady said.

"I should think she does not know whether she is on her head or her
heels," cried the rector; "I don't feel very sure myself. And Walter!
What a change, to be sure, for that boy! I hope he will make a good use
of it. I hope he will not dart off with Underwood and such fellows and
make a fool of himself. Mind, I don't mean that I think so badly of
Underwood," he added after a moment, for this was a subject on which,
being mollified as previously mentioned, the rector took the male side
of the question. Mrs. Wynn received the protest in perfect silence, not
even shaking her head.

"But if he took a fancy for horses or that sort of thing," Mr. Wynn
added with a moment's hesitation; then he brightened up again--"of
course it is better that he should know somebody who has a little
experience in any case; and you will perceive, my dear, there is a
great difference between a penniless youth like Walter Methven getting
such notions in his head which lead only to ruin, and young Lord
Erradeen dabbling a little in amusements which, after all, have no harm
in them if not carried too far, and are natural in his rank--but you
women are always prejudiced on such a point."

"I did not say anything, my dear," the old lady said.

"Oh, no, you don't say anything," cried the rector fretfully, "but I see
it in every line of your shawl and every frill of your cap. You are just
stiff with prejudice so far as Underwood is concerned, who really is not
at all a bad fellow when you come to know him, and is always respectful
to religion, and shows a right feeling--but one might as well try to fly
as to convince you when you have taken a prejudice."

Mrs. Wynn made no protest against this. She said only, "It is a great
ordeal for a boy to pass through. I wonder if his mother----" And here
she paused, not having yet, perhaps, formulated into words the thoughts
that arose in her heart.

"It is to be hoped that she will let him alone," the rector said; "she
has indulged him in everything hitherto; but just now, when he is far
better left to himself, no doubt she will be wanting to interfere."

"Do you think she has indulged him in everything?" said the old lady;
but she did not think it necessary to accuse her husband of prejudice.
Perhaps he understood Captain Underwood as much better as she
understood Mrs. Methven; so she said nothing more. She was the only
individual in Sloebury who had any notion of the struggle in which
Walter's mother had wrecked so much of her own peace.

"There cannot be any two opinions on that subject," said the rector.
"Poor lad! You will excuse me, my dear, but I am always sorry for a boy
left to a woman's training. He is either a mere milksop or a
ne'er-do-well. Walter is not a milksop, and here has Providence stepped
in, in the most wonderful way, to save him from being the other: but
that is no virtue of hers. You will stand up, of course, for your own
side."

The old lady smiled and shook her head. "I think every child is the
better for having both its parents, Julius, if that is what you mean."

This was not exactly what he meant, but it took the wind out of the
rector's sails. "Yes, it is an ordeal for him," he said, "but, I am
sure, if my advice can do him any good, it is at his service; and,
though I have been out of the way of many things for some time, yet I
dare say the world is very much what it was, and I used to know it well
enough."

"He will ask for nobody's advice," said Mrs. Wynn.

"Which makes it all the more desirable he should have it," cried the
rector; and then he said, "Bless me! I have got my cassock on still.
Tell John to take it down to the vestry--though, by the way, there is a
button off, and you might as well have it put on for me, as it is
here."

Mrs. Wynn executed the necessary repair of the cassock with her own
hands. Though she was rheumatic, and did not care to leave her chair
oftener than was necessary, she had still the use of her hands, and she
had a respect for all the accessories of the clerical profession. She
was sitting examining the garment to see if any other feeblenesses were
apparent, in which a stitch in time might save after labours, when, with
a little eager tap at the door, another visitor came in. This was a
young lady of three or four and twenty, with a good deal of the beauty
which consists in fresh complexion and pleasant colour. Her hair was
light brown, warm in tone; her eyes were brown and sparkling; her cheeks
and lips bloomed with health. She had a pretty figure, full of life and
energy--everything, in short, that is necessary to make up a pretty
girl, without any real loveliness or deeper grace. She came in quickly,
brimming over, as was evident, with something which burst forth as soon
as she had given the old lady the hasty conventional kiss of greeting,
and which, as a matter of course, turned out to be the news of which
Sloebury was full.

"Did you ever hear anything so wonderful?" she said. "Walter Methven,
that nobody thought anything of--and now he is turned into a live lord!
a real peer of parliament! they say. I thought mamma would have fainted
when she heard it."

"Why should your mamma faint when she heard of it, July? It is very
pleasant news."

"Oh, Aunt Lydia! don't you know why? I am so angry: I feel as if I
should never speak to her again. Don't you remember? And I always
thought you had some hand in it. Oh, you sit there and look so innocent,
but that is because you are so deep."

"Am I deep?" the old lady asked with a smile.

"You are the deepest person I ever knew: you see through us all, and you
just throw in a word; and then, when people act upon it, you look so
surprised. I heard you myself remark to mamma how often Walter Methven
was at our house."

"Yes, I think I did remark it," Mrs. Wynn said.

"And what was the harm? He liked to come, and he liked me; and I hope
you don't think I am the sort of person to forget myself and think too
much about a man."

"I thought you were letting him be seen with you too often, July, that
is true."

"You thought it might keep others off that were more eligible? Well,
that is what I supposed you meant, for I never like to take a bad view.
But, you see, there was somebody that was eligible; and here has he
turned, all at once, into the very best match within a hundred miles. If
mamma had only let things alone, what prospects might be opening upon me
now!"

"Half-a-dozen girls, I am afraid, may say just the same," said Mrs.
Wynn.

"Well, what does that matter? He had nothing else to do. When a young
man has nothing to do he must be making up to somebody. I don't blame
him a bit; that is what makes us girls always ready for a flirtation.
Time hangs so heavy on our hands. And only think, Aunt Lydia, if things
had been allowed to go on (and I could always have thrown him off if
anything better turned up), only think what might have happened to me
now. I might be working a coronet in all my new handkerchiefs," cried
the girl: "only imagine! oh, oh, oh!"

And she pretended to cry; but there was a sparkle of nervous energy all
the same in her eyes, as if she were eager for the chase, and scarcely
able to restrain her impatience. Mrs. Wynn shook her head at her visitor
with a smile.

"You are not so worldly as you give yourself out to be," she said.

"Oh, that just shows how little you know. I am as worldly as ever woman
was. I think of nothing but how to establish myself, and have plenty of
money. We want it so! Oh, I know you are very good to us--both my uncle
and you; but mamma is extravagant, and I am extravagant, and naturally
all that anybody thinks of is to have what is necessary and decent for
us. We have to put up with it, but I hate what is necessary and decent.
I should like to go in satin and lace to-day even if I knew I should be
in rags to-morrow; and to think if you had not interfered that I might
have blazed in diamonds, and gone to court, and done everything I want
to do! I could strangle you, Aunt Lydia, and mamma too!" Upon which Miss
July (or Julée, which was how her name was pronounced) gave Mrs. Wynn a
sudden kiss and took the cassock out of her hands. "If it wants any
mending I will do it," she said; "it will just give me a little
consolation for the moment. And you will have time to think and answer
this question: Is it too late now?"

"July, dear, it hurts me to hear you talk so--you are not so wild as you
take credit for being."

"I am not wild at all, Aunt Lydia," said the girl, appropriating Mrs.
Wynn's implements, putting on her thimble, threading her needle, and
discovering at one glance the little rent in the cassock which the old
lady had been searching for in vain, "except with indignation to think
what I have lost--if I have lost it. It is all very well to speak, but
what is a poor girl to do? Yes, I know, to make just enough to live on
by teaching, or something of that sort; but that is not what I want. I
want to be well off. I am so extravagant, and so is mamma. We keep
ourselves down, we don't spend money; but we hate it so! I would go
through a great many disagreeables if I could only have enough to
spend."

"And is Walter one of the disagreeables you would go through?"

"Well, no; I could put up with him very well. He is not at all
unpleasant. I don't want him, but I could do with him. Do you really
think it is too late? Don't you think mamma might call upon Mrs. Methven
and say how delighted we are; and just say to him, you know, in a
playful way (mamma could manage that very well), 'We cannot hope to see
you now in our little house, Lord Erradeen!' and then of course he would
be piqued (for he's very generous), and say, 'Why?' And mamma would say,
'Oh, we are such poor little people, and you are now a great man.' Upon
which, as sure as fate, he would be at the Cottage the same evening. And
then!" July threw back her head, and expanded her brown eyes with a
conscious power and sense of capability, as who should say--Then it
would be in my own hands.--"Don't you think that's very good for a
plan?" she added, subsiding quickly to the work, which she executed as
one to the manner born.

"I don't think anything of it as a plan--and neither do you; and your
mother would not do it, July," the old lady said.

"Ah," said July, throwing back her head, "there you have hit the blot,
Aunt Lydia. Mamma wouldn't do it! She could, you know. When she likes
she is the completest humbug!--but not always. And she has so many
notions about propriety, and what is womanly, and so forth--just like
you. Poor women have no business with such luxuries. I tell her we must
be of our time, and all that sort of thing; but she won't see it. No, I
am afraid that is just the difficulty. It all depends on mamma--and
mamma won't. Well, it is a little satisfaction to have had it all out
with you. If you had not interfered, you two, and stopped the poor boy
coming----"

At this juncture John threw open the door, and with a voice which he
reserved for the great county ladies, announced "Mrs. Methven." John had
heard the great news too.

"--Stopped the poor boy coming," July said. The words were but half out
of her mouth when John opened the door, and it was next to impossible
that the new visitor had not heard them. A burning blush covered the
girl's face. She sprang to her feet with the cassock in her arms, and
gazed at the new comer. Mrs. Methven for the first moment did not notice
this third person. She came in with the content and self-absorption of
one who has a great wonder to tell. The little world of Sloebury and all
its incidents were as nothing to her. She went up to old Mrs. Wynn with
a noiseless swiftness.

"I have come to tell you great news," she said.

"Let me look at you," said the old lady. "I have heard, and I scarcely
could believe it. Then it is all true?"

"I am sorry I was not the first to tell you. I think such a thing must
get into the air. Nobody went out from my house last night, and yet
everybody knows. I saw even the people in the street looking at me as I
came along. Mrs. Wynn, you always stood up for him; I never said
anything, but I know you did. I came first to you. Yes, it is all true."

The old lady had known it now for several hours, and had been gently
excited, no more. Now her eyes filled with tears, she could not have
told why.

"Dear boy! I hope God will bless him, and make him worthy and great,"
she said, clasping her old hands together. "He has always been a
favourite with me."

"He is a favourite with everybody," said July. No one had noticed her
presence, and she was not one that could remain unseen. "Everybody is
glad; there is not one that doesn't wish him well."

Did she intend to strike that _coup_ for herself which her mother was
not to be trusted to make? Mrs. Wynn thought so with a great tremor, and
interrupted her in a tone that for her was hurried and anxious.

"July speaks nothing but the truth, Mrs. Methven; there is nobody that
does not like Walter; but I suppose I ought now to drop these
familiarities and call him Lord Erradeen?"

"He will never wish his old friends to do that," said Mrs. Methven. She
already smiled with a gracious glance and gesture: and the feeling that
these old friends were almost too much privileged in being so near to
him, and admitted to such signs of friendship, came into her mind; but
she did not care to have July share her expansion. "Miss Herbert," she
said, with a little bow, "is very good to speak so kindly. But everybody
is kind. I did not know my boy was so popular. Sunshine," she added,
with a smile, "brings out all the flowers."

She had not sat down, and she evidently did not mean to do so while July
remained. There was something grand in her upright carriage, in her air
of superiority, which had never been apparent before. She had always
been a woman, as Sloebury people said, who thought a great deal of
herself; but no one had ever acknowledged her right to do so till now.
On the other hand, July Herbert was well used to the cold shade. Her
mother was Mrs. Wynn's niece, but she was none the less poor for that,
and as July was not a girl to be easily put down, she was acquainted
with every manner of polite snubbing known in the society of the place.
This of standing till she should go was one with which she was perfectly
familiar, and in many cases it afforded her pleasure to subject the
operator to great personal inconvenience; but on the present occasion
she was not disposed to exercise this power. She would have conciliated
Walter's mother if she could have done so, and on a rapid survey of the
situation she decided that the best plan was to yield.

"I must go and tell mamma the great news," she said. "I am sure she will
never rest till she rushes to you with her congratulations; but I will
tell her you are tired of congratulations already--for of course it is
not a thing upon which there can be two opinions." July laid down the
cassock as she spoke. "I have mended all there is to mend, Aunt Lydia;
you need not take any more trouble about it. Good-bye for the moment.
You may be sure you will see one or other of us before night."

They watched her silently as she went out of the room. Mrs. Methven
saying nothing till the door had closed, Mrs. Wynn with a deprecatory
smile upon her face. She did not altogether approve of her grandniece.
But neither was she willing to hand her over to blame. The old lady felt
the snub July had received more than the girl herself did. She looked a
little wistfully after her. She was half angry when as soon as July
disappeared Mrs. Methven sank down upon a chair near her, huge billows
of black silk rising about her, for she had put on her best gown. Mrs.
Wynn thought that the mother, whose child, disapproved by the world, had
been thus miraculously lifted above its censures, should have been all
the more tolerant of the other who had met no such glorious fate. But
she reflected that _they never see it_, which was her favourite
expression of wonderment, yet explanation of everything. There were so
many things that _they_ ought to learn by; but they never saw it. It was
thus she accounted with that shake of her head for all the errors of
mankind.

Mrs. Methven for her part waited till even the very step of that
objectionable Julia Herbert had died away. She had known by instinct
that if _that_ girl should appear she would be on the watch to make
herself agreeable to Walter's mother. "As if he could ever have thought
of her," she said to herself. Twenty-four hours before Mrs. Methven
would have been glad to think that Walter "thought of" any girl who was
at all in his own position. She would have hailed it as a means of
steadying him, and making him turn seriously to his life. But everything
was now changed, and this interruption had been very disagreeable. She
could scarcely turn to her old friend now with the effusion and emotion
which had filled her when she came in. She held out her hand and grasped
that of the old lady.

"I don't need to tell you what I am feeling," she said. "It is all like
a tumultuous sea of wonder and thankfulness. I wanted it, for I was at
my wits' end."

Mrs. Wynn was a little chilled too, but she took the younger woman's
hand.

"You did not know what was coming," she said. "You wanted one thing, and
Providence was preparing another."

"I don't know if that is how to state it; but at all events I was
getting to feel that I could not bear it any longer, and trying for any
way of setting things right: when the good came in this superlative way.
I feel frightened when I think of it. After we knew last night I could
do nothing but cry. It took all the strength from me. You would have
thought it was bad news."

"I can understand that." The old lady relinquished the hand which she
had been holding. "To be delivered from any anxieties you may have had
in such a superlative way, as you say, is not the common lot--most of us
have just to fight them out."

Mrs. Methven already felt herself far floated away from those that had
to fight it out. The very words filled her heart with an elation beyond
speech.

"And this morning," she said, "to wake and to feel it must be folly, and
then to realise that it was true! One knows so well the other sort of
waking when the shock and the pang come all over again. But to wake up
to this extraordinary incredible well-being--one might say happiness!"

The tears of joy were in her eyes, and in those tears there is something
so strange, so rare, that the soul experienced in life looks upon them
almost with more awe than upon the familiar ones of grief which we see
every day. The old lady melted, and her chill of feeling yielded to a
tender warmth. Yet what a pity that They never see it! How much more
perfect it would have been if the woman in her happiness had been
softened and kind to all those whom nothing had happened to!
Imperceptibly the old lady in her tolerant experience shook her gentle
old head. Then she gave herself in full sympathy to hear all the
wonderful details.




CHAPTER V.


The sentiments of the spectators in such a grand alteration of fortune
may be interesting enough, and it is in general more easy to get at them
than at those which fill the mind of the principal actor. In the present
case it is better to say of the principal subject of the change, for
Walter could not be said to be an actor at all. The emotions of the
first evening it would indeed be impossible to describe. To come in from
his small country-town society, to whom even he was so far inferior that
every one of them had facilities of getting and spending money which he
did not possess, and to sit down, all tremulous and guilty, feeling
himself the poorest creature, opposite to the serious and important
personage who came to tell him, with documents as solemn as himself,
that this silly youth who had been throwing away his life for nothing,
without even the swell of excitement to carry him on, had suddenly
become, without deserving it, without doing anything to bring it about,
an individual of the first importance--a peer, a proprietor, a great
man. Walter could have sobbed as his mother did, had not pride kept him
back. When they sat down at table in the little dining-room there were
two at least of the party who ate nothing, who sat and gazed at each
other across the others with white faces and blazing eyes. Mr.
Milnathort made a good dinner, and sat very watchful, making also his
observations, full of curiosity and a certain half-professional
interest. But Cousin Sophy was the only one who really got the good of
this prodigious event. She asked if they might not have some champagne
to celebrate the day. She was in high excitement but quite
self-controlled, and enjoyed it thoroughly. She immediately began in her
thoughts to talk of my young cousin Lord Erradeen. It was a delightful
advancement which would bring her no advantage, and yet almost pleased
her more than so much added on to her income; for Miss Merivale was not
of any distinction in her parentage, and suddenly to find herself cousin
to a lord went to her heart: it was a great benefit to the solitary lady
fond of society, and very eager for a helping hand to aid her up the
ascent. And it was she who kept the conversation going. She even flirted
a little, quite becomingly, with the old lawyer, who felt her, it was
evident, a relief from the high tension of the others, and was amused by
the vivacious middle-aged lady, who for the moment had everything her
own way. After dinner there was a great deal of explanation given, and a
great many facts made clear, but it is to be doubted whether Walter knew
very well what was being said. He listened with an air of attention,
but it was as if he were listening to some fairy tale. Something out of
the _Arabian Nights_ was being repeated before him. He was informed how
the different branches of his family had died out one after another.
"Captain Methven was aware that he was in the succession," the lawyer
said; and Mrs. Methven cast a thought back, half-reproachful,
half-approving upon her husband, who had been dead so long that his
words and ways were like shadows to her, which she could but faintly
recall. Would it have been better if he had told her? After pursuing
this thought a long time she decided that it would not, that he had done
wisely--yet felt a little visionary grudge and disappointment to think
that he had been able to keep such a secret from her. No doubt it was
all for the best. She might have distracted herself with hopes, and worn
out her mind with waiting. It was doubtful if the support of knowing
what was going to happen would really have done her any good; but yet it
seemed a want of trust in her, it seemed even to put her in a partially
ridiculous position now, as knowing nothing, not having even an idea of
what was coming. But Walter did not share any of these goings back upon
the past. He had scarcely known his father, nor was he old enough to
have had such a secret confided to him for long after Captain Methven
died. He thought nothing of that. He sat with an appearance of the
deepest attention, but unaware of what was being said, with a vague
elation in his mind, something that seemed to buoy him up above the
material earth. He could not bring himself down again. It was what he
remembered to have felt when he was a child when some long-promised
pleasure was coming--to-morrow. Even in that case hindrances might come
in. It might rain to-morrow, or some similar calamity might occur. But
rain could not affect this. He sat and listened and did not hear a word.

Next morning Walter awoke very early, before the wintry day had fully
dawned. He opened his eyes upon a sort of paling and whitening of
everything--a grey perception of the walls about him, and the lines of
the window marked upon the paleness outside. What was it that made even
these depressing facts exhilarate him and rouse an incipient delight in
his mind, which for the moment he did not understand? Then he sat up
suddenly in his bed. It was cold, it was dark. There was no assiduous
servant to bring hot water or light his fire--everything was chilling
and wretched; and he was not given to early rising. Ordinarily it was an
affair of some trouble to get him roused, to see that he was in time for
a train or for any early occupation. But this morning he found it
impossible to lie still; an elasticity in him, an elation and buoyancy,
which he almost felt, with a laugh, might float him up to the ceiling,
like the mediums, made him jump up, as it were in self-defence. It
buoyed him, it carried him as on floating pinions into a limitless
heaven. What was it? Who was he? The chill of the morning brought him a
little to himself, and then he sat down in his shirt-sleeves and
delivered himself up to the incredible, and laughed low and long, with a
sense of the impossibility of it that brought tears to his eyes. He Lord
Erradeen, Lord Anything! He a peer, a great man! he with lands and money
and wealth of every sort, who last night had been pleased to win two
sixpences! After the buoyancy and sensation of rising beyond the world
altogether, which was a kind of physical consciousness of something
great that had happened before he was awake, came this sense of the
ludicrous, this incredulity and confused amusement. He dressed himself
in this mood, laughing low from time to time, to himself, as if it were
some game which was being played upon him, but of which he was in the
secret, and not to be deceived, however artfully it might be managed.
But when he was dressed and ready to go down-stairs--by which time
daylight had fully struggled forth upon a wet and clammy world--he
stopped himself short with a sudden reminder that to-day this curious
practical joke was to extend its career and become known to the world.
He laughed again, but then he grew grave, standing staring at the closed
door of his bedroom, out of which he was about to issue--no longer a
nobody--in a new character, to meet the remarks, the congratulations of
his friends. He knew that the news would fly through the little town
like lightning; that people would stop each other in the streets and
ask, "Have you heard it?--is it true?" and that throughout the whole
place there would be a sort of revolution, a general change of
positions, which would confuse the very world. He knew vaguely that
whatever else might happen he would be uppermost. The people who had
disapproved of him, and treated him _de haut en bas_, would find this to
be impossible any longer. He would be in a position which is to be seen
on the stage and in books more frequently than in common life--possessed
of the power of making retribution, of punishing the wicked, and
distributing to the good tokens of his favour. It is a thing we would
all like to do, to avenge ourselves (within due Christian and social
limits) on the persons who have despised us, and to reward those who
have believed in us, showing the one how right they were, and the other
how wrong they were, with a logic that should be undeniable. There is
nobody who has ever endured a snub--and who has not?--who would not
delight in doing this; but the most of us never get such a supreme
gratification, and Walter was to have it. He was going to see everybody
abashed and confounded who had ever treated him with contumely. Once
more he felt that sensation of buoyancy and elation as if he were
spurning earth with his foot and ready to soar into some sort of
celestial sphere. And then once more he laughed to himself. Was it
possible? could it be? would anybody believe it? He thought there would
be an explosion of incredulous laughter through all the streets; but
then, when that was over, both friends and foes would be forced to
believe it--as he himself was forced to believe.

With that he opened his door, and went down-stairs into the new world.
He stumbled over the housemaid's pail, of course, but did not call forth
any frown upon that functionary's freckled forehead as he would have
done yesterday. On the contrary, she took away the pail, and begged his
pardon with awe--being of course entirely blameless. He paused for a
moment on the steps as he faced the raw morning air going out, and lo!
the early baker, who was having a word with cook at the area over the
rolls, turned towards him with a reverential look, and pulled off his
cap. These were the first visible signs of Walter's greatness; they gave
him a curious sort of conviction that after all the thing was true.

There was scarcely anybody about the Sloebury streets except bakers and
milkmen at this hour. It was a leisurely little town, in which nothing
particular was doing, no manufactures or business to demand early hours;
and the good people did not get up early. Why should they? the day was
long enough without that: so that Walter met no one in his early
promenade. But before he got back there were symptoms that the
particular baker who had taken off his cap had whispered the news to
others of his fraternity, who, having no tie of human connection, such
as supplying the family with rolls, to justify a salutation, only
stared at him with awe-stricken looks as he went past. He felt he was
an object of interest even to the policeman going off duty, who being an
old soldier, saluted with a certain grandeur as he tramped by. The young
man took an aimless stroll through the half-awakened district. The roads
were wet, the air raw: it was not a cheerful morning; damp and
discouragement breathed in the air; the little streets looked squalid
and featureless in shabby British poverty; lines of low, two-storied
brick, all commonplace and monotonous. It was the sort of morning to
make you think of the tediousness to which most people get up every day,
supposing it to be life, and accepting it as such with the dull content
which knows no better; a life made up of scrubbing out of kitchens and
sweeping out of parlours, of taking down shutters and putting them up
again; all sordid, petty, unbroken by an exhilarating event. But this
was not what struck Walter as he floated along in his own wonderful
atmosphere, seeing nothing, noting everything with the strange vision of
excitement. Afterwards he recollected with extraordinary vividness a man
who stood stretching his arms in shirt sleeves above his head for a
long, soul-satisfying yawn, and remembered to have looked up at the
shop-window within which he was standing, and read the name of Robinson
in gilt letters. Robinson, yawning in his shirt-sleeves, against a
background of groceries, pallid in the early light, remained with him
like a picture for many a day.

When he got back the breakfast table was spread, and his mother taking
her place at it. Mr. Milnathort had not gone away as he intended by the
night train. He had remained in Mrs. Methven's spare room, surrounded by
all the attentions and civilities that a household of women, regarding
him with a sort of awe as a miraculous messenger or even creator of good
fortune, could show to a bachelor gentleman, somewhat prim and
old-fashioned in his habits and ways. It was his intention to leave
Sloebury by the eleven o'clock train, and he had arranged that Walter
should meet him in Edinburgh within a week, to be made acquainted with
several family matters, in which, as the head of the house, it was
necessary that he should be fully instructed. Neither Walter nor his
mother paid very much attention to these arrangements, nor even remarked
that the old lawyer spoke of them with great gravity. Mrs. Methven was
busy making tea, and full of anxiety that Mr. Milnathort should
breakfast well and largely, after what she had always understood to be
the fashion of his country; and as for Walter, he was not in a state of
mind to observe particularly any such indications of manner. Cousin
Sophia was the only one who remarked the solemnity of his tone and
aspect.

"One would suppose there was some ordeal to go through," she said in her
vivacious way.

"A young gentleman who is taking up a large fortune and a great
responsibility will have many ordeals to go through, madam," Mr.
Milnathort said in his deliberate tones: but he did not smile or take
any other notice of her archness. It was settled accordingly, that after
a few days for preparation and leave-taking, young Lord Erradeen should
leave Sloebury. "And if I might advise, alone," Mr. Milnathort said,
"the place is perhaps not just in a condition to receive ladies. I would
think it wiser on the whole, madam, if you deferred your coming till his
lordship there has settled everything for your reception."

"_My_ coming?" said Mrs. Methven. The last twelve hours had made an
extraordinary difference in her feelings and faith; but still she had
not forgotten what had gone before, nor the controversies and struggles
of the past. "We must leave all that for after consideration," she said.

Walter was about to speak impulsively, but old Milnathort stopped him
with a skilful interruption--

"It will perhaps be the wisest way," he said; "there will be many things
to arrange. When Lord Erradeen has visited the property, and understands
everything about it, then he will be able to----"

Walter heard the name at first with easy unconsciousness: then it
suddenly blazed forth upon him as his own name. His mother at the other
end of the table felt the thrill of the same sensation. Their eyes met;
and all the wonder of this strange new life suddenly gleamed upon them
with double force. It is true that the whole condition of their minds
was affected by this revelation, that there was nothing about them that
was not full of it, and that they were actually at this moment
discussing the business connected with it. Still it all came to life now
as at the first moment at the sound of this name, Lord Erradeen! Walter
could not help laughing to himself over his coffee.

"I can't tell who you mean," he said. "You must wait a little until I
realise what Walter Methven has got to do with it."

Mrs. Methven thought that this was making too much of the change. She
already wished to believe, or at least to persuade Mr. Milnathort to
believe, that she was not so very much surprised after all.

"Lord Erradeen," she said, "is too much amused at present with having
got a new name to take the change very seriously."

"He will soon learn the difference, madam," said Mr. Milnathort.
"Property is a thing that has always to be taken seriously: and of all
property the Erradeen lands. There are many things connected with them
that he will have to set his face to in a way that will be far from
amusing."

The old lawyer had a very grave countenance--perhaps it was because he
was a Scotchman. He worked through his breakfast with a steady routine
that filled the ladies with respect. First fish, then kidneys, then a
leg of the partridge that had been left from dinner last night; finally
he looked about the table with an evident sense of something wanting,
and though he declared that it was of no consequence, avowed at last,
with some shyness, that it was the marmalade for which he was looking:
and there was none in the house! Mr. Milnathort was full of excuses for
having made such a suggestion. It was just a Scotch fashion he declared;
it was of no consequence. Mrs. Methven, who held an unconscious
conviction that it was somehow owing to him that Walter had become Lord
Erradeen, was made quite unhappy by the omission.

"I shall know better another time," she said regretfully. They were all
still under the impression more or less that it was his doing. He was
not a mere agent to them, but the god, out of the machinery, who had
turned darkness into light. He justified this opinion still more fully
before he went away, putting into Walter's hand a cheque-book from a
London bank, into which a sum of money which seemed to the inexperienced
young man inexhaustible, had been paid to his credit. The old gentleman
on his side seemed half-embarrassed, half-impatient after a while by the
attention shown him. He resisted when Walter declared his intention of
going to the railway to see him off.

"That is just a reversal of our positions," he said.

At this Mrs. Methven became a little anxious, fearing that perhaps
Walter's simplicity might be going too far. She gave him a word of
warning when the cab drove up for Mr. Milnathort's bag. It was not a
very large one, and Walter was quite equal to the condescension of
carrying it to the station if his mother had not taken that precaution.
She could not make up her mind that he was able to manage for himself.

"You must remember that after all he is only your man of business," she
said, notwithstanding all the worship she had herself been paying to
this emissary of fortune. It was a relief to shake hands with him, to
see him drive away from the door, leaving behind him such an amazing,
such an incalculable change. Somehow it was more easy to realise it when
he was no longer there. And this was what Walter felt when he walked
away from the railway, having seen with great satisfaction the grizzled
head of the old Scotsman nod at him from a window of the departing
train. The messenger was gone; the thing which he had brought with him,
did that remain? Was it conceivable that it was now fixed and certain
not to be affected by anything that could be done or said? Walter walked
steadily enough along the pavement, but he did not think he was doing
so. The world around him swam in his eyes once more. He could not make
sure that he was walking on solid ground, or mounting up into the air.
How different it was from the way in which he had come forth yesterday,
idle, half-guilty, angry with himself and everybody, yet knowing very
well what to do, turning with habitual feet into the way where all the
other idlers congregated, knowing who he should meet and what would
happen. He was separated from all that as if by an ocean. He had no
longer anything to do with these foolish loungers. His mother had told
him a thousand times in often varied tones that they were not companions
for him; to-day he recognised the fact with a certain disgust. He felt
it more strongly still when he suddenly came across Captain Underwood
coming up eagerly with outstretched hands.

"I hope I am the first to congratulate you, Lord Erradeen," he said.
"Now you will know why I asked you yesterday, Was there any news----"

"Now I shall know? I don't a bit; what do you mean? Do you mean me to
believe that _you_ had any hand in it?" Walter cried, with a tone of
mingled incredulity and disdain.

"No hand in it, unless I had helped to put the last poor dear lord out
of the way. I could scarcely have had that; but if you mean did I know
about it, I certainly did, as you must if you had been a little more in
the world."

"Why didn't you tell me then?" said Walter. He added somewhat hotly,
with something of the sublime assumption of youth: "Waiting for a man to
die would never have suited me. I much prefer to have been, as you say,
out of the world----"

"Oh, Lord! I didn't mean to offend you," said the captain. "Don't get on
a high horse. Of course, if you'd known your Debrett as I do, you would
have seen the thing plain enough. However, we needn't quarrel about it.
I have always said you were my pupil, and I hope I have put you up to a
few things that will be of use on your entry into society."

"Have you?" said Walter. He could not think how he had ever for a moment
put up with this under-bred person. Underwood stood before him with a
sort of jaunty rendering of the appeal with which grooms and people
about the stable remind a young man of what in his boyish days they have
done for him--an appeal which has its natural issue in a sovereign. But
he could not give Underwood a sovereign, and it was perhaps just a
little ungenerous to turn in the first moment of his prosperity from a
man who, from whatever purpose, had been serviceable to him in his
poverty. He said, with an attempt to be more friendly: "I know,
Underwood, you have been very kind."

"Oh, by Jove! kind isn't the word. I knew you'd want a bit of training;
the best thoroughbred that ever stepped wants that; and if I can be of
any use to you in the future, I will. I knew old Erradeen; I've known
all about the family for generations. There are a great many curious
things about it, but I think I can help you through them," said the
captain with a mixture of anxiety and swagger. There had always been
something of this same mixture about him, but Walter had never been
fully conscious what it was till now.

"Thank you," he said; "perhaps it will be better to let that develop
itself in a natural way. I am going to Scotland in a week, and then I
shall have it at first hand."

"Then I can tell you beforehand you will find a great many things you
won't like," said Underwood, abruptly. "It is not for nothing that a
family gets up such a reputation. I know two or three of your places.
Mulmorrel, and the shooting-box on Loch Etive, and that mysterious old
place at Kinloch-houran. I have been at every one of them. It was not
everybody, I can tell you, that old Erradeen would have taken to that
place. Why, there is a mystery at every corner. There is----"

Walter held up his hand to stay this torrent. He coloured high with a
curious sentiment of proprietorship and the shrinking of pride from
hearing that which was his discussed by strangers. He scarcely knew the
names of them, and their histories not at all. He put up his hand: "I
would rather find out the mysteries for myself," he said.

"Oh," cried Underwood, "if you are standing on your dignity, my lord, as
you like, for that matter. I am not one to thrust my company upon any
man if he doesn't like it. I have stood your friend, and I would again;
but as for forcing myself upon you now that you've come to your
kingdom----"

"Underwood," cried the other, touched in the tenderest point, "if you
dare to insinuate that this has changed me, I desire never to speak to
you again. But it is only, I suppose, one of the figures of speech that
people use when they are angry. I am not such a cad as you make me out.
Whether my name is Methven or Erradeen--I don't seem to know very well
which it is----"

"It is both," the other cried with a great laugh, and they shook hands,
engaging to dine together at the hotel that evening. Underwood, who was
knowing in such matters, was to order the dinner, and two or three of
"the old set," were to be invited. It would be a farewell to his former
comrades, as Walter intended; and with a curious recurrence of his first
elation he charged his representative to spare no expense. There was
something intoxicating and strange in the very phrase.

As he left Underwood and proceeded along the High Street, where, if he
had not waved his hand to them in passing with an air of haste and
pre-occupation, at least every second person he met would have stopped
him to wish him joy, he suddenly encountered July Herbert. She was going
home from the vicarage, out of which his mother had politely driven her;
and it seemed the most wonderful luck to July to get him to herself,
thus wholly unprotected, and with nobody even to see what she was after.
She went up to him, not with Underwood's eagerness, but with a pretty
frank pleasure in her face.

"I have heard a fairy tale," she said, "and it is true----"

"I suppose you mean about me," said Walter. "Yes, I am afraid it is
true. I don't exactly know who I am at present."

"Afraid!" cried July. "Ah, you know you don't mean that. At all events,
you are no longer just the old Walter whom we have known all our lives."

There was another girl with her whom Walter knew but slightly, but who
justified the plural pronoun.

"On the contrary, I was going to say, when you interrupted me----"

"I am so sorry I interrupted you."

"That though I did not know who I was in the face of the world, I was
always the old Walter, &c. A man, I believe, can never lose his
Christian name."

"Nor a woman either," said July. "That is the only thing that cannot be
taken from us. We are supposed, you know, rather to like the loss of the
other one."

"I have heard so," said Walter, who was not unaccustomed to this sort of
fencing. "But I suppose it is not true."

"Oh," said July, "if it were for the same reason that makes you change
your name, I should not mind. But there is no peerage in our family that
I know of, and I should not have any chance if there were, alas!
Good-bye, Lord Erradeen. It is a lovely name! And may I always speak to
you when I meet you, though you are such a grand personage? We do not
hope to see you at the Cottage now, but mamma will like to know that you
still recognise an old friend."

"I shall come and ask Mrs. Herbert what she thinks of it all," Walter
said.

July's brown eyes flashed out with triumph as she laughed and waved her
hand to him. She said--

"It will be too great an honour," and curtseyed; then laughed again as
she went on, casting a glance at him over her shoulder.

He laughed too; he was young, and he was gratified even by this
undisguised provocation, though he could not help saying to himself,
with a slight beat of his heart, how near he was to falling in love with
that girl! What a good thing it was that he did not--_now_!

As for July, she looked at him with a certain ferocity, as if she would
have devoured him. To think of all that boy had it in his power to give
if he pleased, and to think how little a poor girl could do!




CHAPTER VI.


Mrs. Methven was conscious of a new revival of the old displeasure when
Walter informed her of the engagement he had formed for the evening. She
was utterly disappointed. She had thought that the great and beneficial
shock of this new life would turn his character altogether, and convert
him into that domestic sovereign, that object of constant reference,
criticism, and devotion which every woman would have every man be. It
was a wonderful mortification and enlightenment to find that without
even the interval of a single evening devoted to the consideration of
his new and marvellous prospects, and that talking over which is one of
the sweetest parts of a great and happy event, he should return--to
what?--to wallowing in the mire, as the Scripture says, to his old
billiard-room acquaintances, the idlers and undesirable persons with
whom he had formed associations. Could there be anything more unsuitable
than Lord Erradeen in the midst of such a party, with Underwood, and
perhaps worse than Underwood. It wounded her pride and roused her
temper, and, in spite of all her efforts, it was with a lowering brow
that she saw him go away. Afterwards, indeed, when she thought of it, as
she did for hours together, while cousin Sophia talked, and she
languidly replied, maintaining a conversation from the lips outward, so
poor a substitute for the evening's talking over and happy consultation
she had dreamed of--Mrs. Methven was more just to her son. She tried
always to be just, poor lady. She placed before herself all the reasons
for his conduct. That he should entertain the men who, much against her
wish and his own good, yet in their way had been kind to and entertained
him, was natural. But to do it this first evening was hard, and she
could not easily accept her disappointment. Afterwards she reminded
herself with a certain stern philosophy that because Walter had owned a
touch of natural emotion, and had drawn near to her and confessed
himself in the wrong, that was no reason why his character should be
changed in a moment. There were numbers of men who on occasion felt and
lamented their misdoing, yet went on again in the same way. He had been
no doubt startled, as some are by calamity, by the more extraordinary
shock of this good fortune; but why should he for that abandon all the
tastes and occupations of his former life? It was she, she said to
herself, with some bitterness, who was a fool. The fact was that Walter
meant no harm at all, and that it was merely the first impulse of a
half-scornful liberality, impatience of the old associations, which he
had tacitly acknowledged were not fit for him, that led him back to his
former companions. He felt afterwards that it would have been in better
taste had he postponed this for a night. But he was very impatient and
eager to shake himself free of them, and enter upon his new career.

Something of the same disappointed and disapproving sentiment filled
Mrs. Methven's mind when she heard of his visit to the Cottage. She knew
no reason why he should take a special leave of July Herbert; if he knew
himself a reason, which he did not disclose, that was another matter.
Thoughts like this embittered the preparations for his departure, which
otherwise would have been so agreeable. She had to see after many things
which a young man of more wealth, or more independent habits, would have
done for himself--his linen, his portmanteau, most of the things he
wanted, except the tailor part of the business; but it was not until the
last evening that there was any of the confidential consultation, for
which her heart had longed. Even on that last day Walter had been very
little indoors. He had been busy with a hundred trifles, and she had
begun to make up her mind to his going away without a word said as to
their future relations, as to whether he meant his mother to share any
of the advantages of his new position, or to drop her at Sloebury as
something done with, which he did not care to burden himself with, any
more than the other circumstances of his past career. She did so little
justice to the real generosity of her son's temper in the closeness of
her contest with him, and the heat of personal feeling, that she had
begun to make up her mind to this, with what pain and bitterness it is
unnecessary to say.

She had even began to make excuses for her own desertion in the tumult
of endless thought upon this one subject which possessed her. She would
be just; after all, was it not better perhaps that she should be left in
the little house which was her independent home, for which she owed
nothing to any one? If any unnecessary sense of gratitude made him offer
her reluctantly a share in his new life, that would be humiliation
indeed. If, as was apparent, her society, her advice, her love were
nothing to him, was it not far better that both should recognise the
situation, and view things in their true light? This the proud woman had
made up her mind to, with what depth of wounded tenderness and
embittered affection who could say? She had packed for him with her own
hands, for all his permanent arrangements were to be made after he had
left Sloebury, and to change her household in consequence of an
alteration of fortune which, according to all appearances, would not
concern her, was, she had proudly decided, quite out of the question.
She packed for him as in the days when he was going to school, when he
was a boy, and liked everything better that had been done by his mother.
A woman may be pardoned for feeling such a difference with a passionate
soreness and sense of downfall. In those days how she had thought of the
time when he would be grown up, when he would understand all her
difficulties and share all her cares, and in his own advancement make
her triumphant and happy! God forgive me, she said to herself, now he
has got advancement far above my hopes, and I am making myself wretched
thinking of myself. She stopped and cried a little over his new linen.
No, he was right; if it must be allowed that they did not "get on," it
was indeed far better in the long run that there should be no false
sentiment, no keeping up of an untenable position. Thank God she
required nothing; she had enough; she wanted neither luxury nor
grandeur, and her home, her natural place was here, where she had lived
so many years, where she could disarm all comment upon Walter's neglect
of her, by saying that she preferred the place where she had lived so
long, and where she had so many friends. Why, indeed, should she change
her home at her time of life? No doubt he would come back some time and
see her; but after all why should her life be unsettled because his was
changed? It was he who showed true sense in his way of judging the
matter, she said to herself with a smile, through the hastily dried and
momentary tears.

Walter came in when the packing was just about concluded. He came half
way up the stairs and called "Mother, where are you?" as he had often
done when he was a boy and wanted her at every turn, but as he never did
now. This touched and weakened her again in her steady resolution to
let him see no repining in her. "Are you packing for me?" he called out
again; "what a shame while I have been idling! But come down, mother,
please, and leave that. You forget we have everything to settle yet."

"What is there to settle?" she said, with a certain sharpness of tone
which she could not quite suppress, coming out upon the landing. The
maids who were going to bed, and who heard all this, thought it was
beautiful to hear his lordship speaking like that, quite natural to his
mother; but that missus was that hard it was no wonder if they didn't
get on; and Cousin Sophia from her virgin retirement, where she sat in
her dressing-gown reading a French novel, and very much alive to every
sound, commented in her own mind, closing her book, in the same sense.
"Now she will just go and hold him at arm's length while the boy's heart
is melting, and then break her own," Miss Merivale said to herself. Thus
everybody was against her and in favour of the fortunate young fellow
who had been supping on homage and flattery, and now came in easy and
careless to make everything straight at the last moment. Mrs. Methven on
her side was very tired, and tremulous with the exertion of packing. It
would have been impossible for her to banish that tone out of her voice.
She stood in the subdued light upon the stairs looking down upon him,
leaning on the banister to support herself; while he, with all the light
from below upon his face, ruddy with the night air, and the applauses,
and his own high well-being, looked up gaily at her. He had shaken off
all his old irritability in the confidence of happiness and good fortune
that had taken possession of him. After a moment he came springing up
the stairs three at a time.

"You look tired, mother, while I have been wasting my time. Come down,
and let us have our talk. I'll do all the rest to-morrow," he said,
throwing his arm round her and leading her down-stairs. He brought her
some wine first of all and a footstool, and threw himself into the easy
task of making her comfortable. "Now," he said, "let's talk it all
over," drawing a chair to her side.

All this was quite new upon Walter's part--or rather quite old,
belonging to an age which had long ago gone.

"Isn't it rather late for that?" she said, with a faint smile.

"Yes, and I am ashamed of myself; but, unfortunately, you are so used to
that. We must settle, however, mother. I am to go first of all to
Kinloch-houran, which Milnathort says is not a place for you. Indeed, I
hear----" here he paused a little as if he would have named his
authority, and continued, "that it is a ruinous sort of place; and why I
should go there, I don't know."

"Where did you hear?" she said, with quick suspicion.

"Well, mother, I would rather not have mentioned his name; but if you
wish to know, from Underwood. I know you are prejudiced against him.
Yes, it is prejudice, though I don't wonder at it. I care nothing for
the fellow; but still it comes out, which is rather strange, that he
knows these places, and a good deal about the Erradeens."

"Is that, then," cried the mother quickly, "the reason of his being
here?"

"He never said so, nor have I asked him," answered Walter, with
something of his old sullenness; but then he added--"The same thought
has crossed my own mind, mother, and I shouldn't wonder if it were so."

"Walter," she said, "a man like that can have but one motive--the desire
to aggrandise himself. For heaven's sake, don't have anything to do with
him; don't let him get an influence over you."

"You must have a very poor opinion of me, mother," he said, in an
aggrieved tone.

She looked at him with a curious gaze, silenced, as it seemed. She loved
him more than anything in the world, and thought of him above
everything; and yet perhaps in that wrath with those we love which works
like madness in the brain, it was true what he said--that she had a poor
opinion of him. Extremes meet, as the proverb says. However, this was a
mystery too deep for Walter to enter into.

"Don't let us waste words about Underwood," he said. "I care nothing for
the fellow; he is vulgar and presuming--as you always said."

Partly, no doubt, this avowal was made with the intention of pleasing
his mother; at the same time it proved the great moral effect of
promotion in rank. Lord Erradeen saw with the utmost distinctness what
Walter Methven had only glimpsed by intervals. And it is impossible to
describe how this speech pleased Mrs. Methven. Her tired eyes began to
shine, her heart to return to its brighter hopes.

"The thing is, what arrangements you wish me to make," said Walter.
"What are you going to do? I hear Mulmorrel is a handsome house, but
it's November, and naturally it is colder in the north. Do you think you
would care to go there now, or wait till the weather is better? It may
want furnishing, for anything I know; and it appears we've got a little
house in town."

"Walter," she said, in a voice which was husky and tremulous, "before
you enter upon all this--you must first think, my dear. Are you sure it
will be for your comfort to have me with you at all? Wouldn't you rather
be free, and make your own arrangements, and leave me--as I am?"

"MOTHER?" the young man cried. He got up suddenly from where he was
sitting beside her, and pushed away his chair, and stood facing her,
with a sudden paleness and fiery eyes that seemed to dazzle her. He had
almost kicked her footstool out of his way in his excitement and wounded
feeling. "Do you mean to say you want to have nothing to do with me?" he
said.

"Oh! my boy, you could not think so. I thought that was what--you meant.
I wish only what is for your good."

"Would it be for my good to be an unnatural cad?" said the young man,
with rising indignation--"a heartless, ill-conditioned whelp, with no
sense and no feeling? Oh, mother! mother! what a poor opinion you must
have of me!" he cried; and so stung was he with this blow that sudden
tears sprang to his eyes. "All because I'm a fool and put everything off
to the last moment," he added, in a sort of undertone, as if explaining
it to himself. "But I'm not a beast for all that," he said, fiercely.

She made him no reply, but sat and gazed at him with a remorse and
compunction, which, painful sentiments as they are, were to her sweet as
the dews from heaven. Yes, it appeared that through all her passionate
and absorbing tenderness she had had a poor opinion of him. She had done
him injustice. The conviction was like a new birth. That he should be
Lord Erradeen was nothing in comparison of being, as he thus proved
himself, good and true, open to the influences of affection and nature.
She could not speak, but her eyes were full of a thousand things; they
asked him mutely to forgive her. They repented, and were abashed and
rejoiced all in one glance. The young man who had not been nearly so
heartless as she feared, was now not nearly so noble as she thought: but
he was greatly touched by the crisis, and by the suggestion of many a
miserable hour which was in her involuntary sin against him and in her
penitence. He came back again and sat close by her, and kissed her
tremulously.

"I have been a cad," he said. "I don't wonder you lost all faith in me,
mother."

"Not that, not that," she said faintly; and then there was a moment of
exquisite silence, in which, without a word, everything was atoned for,
and pardon asked and given.

And then began perhaps the happiest hour of Mrs. Methven's life, in
which they talked over everything and decided what was to be done. Not
to give up the house in Sloebury at present, nor indeed to do anything
at present, save wait till he had made his expedition into Scotland and
seen his new property, and brought her full particulars. After he had
investigated everything and knew exactly the capabilities of the house,
and the condition in which it was, and all the necessities and
expediencies, they would then decide as to the best thing to be done;
whether to go there, though at the worst time of the year, or to go to
London, which was an idea that pleased Walter but alarmed his mother.
Mrs. Methven did her best to remember what were the duties of a great
landed proprietor and to bring them home to her son.

"You ought to spend Christmas at your own place," she said. "There will
be charities and hospitalities and the poor people to look after."

She did not know Scotland, nor did she know very well what it was to be
a great country magnate. She had been but a poor officer's daughter
herself, and had married another officer, and been beaten about from
place to place before she settled down on her small income at Sloebury.
She had not much more experience than Walter himself had in this
respect; indeed, if the truth must be told, both of them drew their
chief information from novels, those much-abused sources of information,
in which the life of rural potentates is a favourite subject, and not
always described with much knowledge. Walter gravely consented to all
this, with a conscientious desire to do what was right: but he thought
the place would most likely be gloomy for his mother in winter, and that
hospitalities would naturally be uncalled for so soon after the death of
the old lord.

"What I would advise would be Park Lane," he said, with a judicial tone.
"Milnathort said that it was quite a small house."

"What is a small house in Park Lane would look a palace at Sloebury,"
Mrs. Methven said: "and you must not begin on an extravagant footing, my
dear."

"You will let us begin comfortably, I hope," he said; "and I must look
for a nice carriage for you, mother."

Walter felt disposed to laugh as he said the words, but carried them off
with an air of easy indifference as if it were the most natural thing in
the world: while his mother on her side could have cried for pleasure
and tenderness.

"You must not mind me, Walter; we must think what is best for yourself,"
she said, as proud and pleased as if she had twenty carriages.

"Nothing of the sort," he said. "We are going to be comfortable, and you
must have everything that is right first of all."

What an hour it was! now and then there will be given to one individual
out of a class a full measure of recompense heaped and overflowing, out
of which the rest may get a sympathetic pleasure though they do not
enjoy it in their own persons. Mrs. Methven had never imagined that this
would come to her, but lo! in a moment it was pouring upon her in floods
of consolation. So absorbing was this happy consultation that it was
only when her eyes suddenly caught the clock on the mantelpiece, and saw
that the hands were marking a quarter to two! that Mrs. Methven startled
awoke out of her bliss.

"My poor boy! that I should keep you up to this hour talking, and a long
journey before you to-morrow!" she cried.

She hustled him up to his room after this, talking and resisting gaily
to the very door. He was happy too with that sense of happiness
conferred, which is always sweet, and especially to youth in the
delightful, easy sense of power and beneficence. When he thought of it
he was a little remorseful, to think that he had possessed the power so
long and never exercised it, for Walter was generous enough to be aware
that the house in Park Lane and the carriage were not the occasions of
his mother's blessedness. "Poor mother," he said to himself softly. He
might have made her a great deal more happy if he had chosen before
these fine things were dreamt of. But Mrs. Methven remembered that no
more. She begged pardon of God on her knees for misjudging her boy, and
for once in her life was profoundly, undoubtingly happy, with a
perfection and fulness of content which perhaps could only come after
long experience of the reverse. After such a moment a human creature, if
possible, should die, so as to taste nothing less sweet: for the less
sweet, to be sure, must come back if life goes on, and at that moment
there was not a cloud or a suggestion of darkness upon the firmament.
She grudged falling asleep, though she was very tired, and so losing
this beautiful hour; but nature is wilful and will seldom abdicate the
night for joy, whatever she may do for grief.

Next morning she went to the station with him to see him away.
Impossible to describe the devotion of all the officials to Lord
Erradeen's comfort on his journey. The station-master kindly came to
superintend this august departure, and the porters ran about contending
for his luggage with an excitement which made, at least, one old
gentleman threaten to write to the _Times_. There was nothing but "my
lord" and "his lordship" to be heard all over the station; and so many
persons came to bid him good-bye and see the last of him, as they said,
that the platform was quite inconveniently crowded. Among these, of
course, was Captain Underwood, whose fervent--"God bless you, my
boy"--drowned all other greetings. He had, however, a disappointed
look--as if he had failed in some object. Mrs. Methven, whose faculties
were all sharpened by her position, and who felt herself able to
exercise a toleration which, in former circumstances, would have been
impossible to her, permitted him to overtake her as she left the place,
and acknowledged his greeting with more cordiality, or, at least, with a
less forbidding civility than usual. And then a wonderful sight was seen
in Sloebury. This _béte noir_ of the feminine world, this man whom every
lady frowned upon, was seen walking along the High Street, side by side,
in earnest conversation with one of the women who had been most
unfavourable to him. Was she listening to an explanation, a
justification, an account of himself, such as he had not yet given, to
satisfy the requirements of the respectability of Sloebury? To tell the
truth, Mrs. Methven now cared very little for any such explanation. She
did not remember, as she ought to have done, that other women's sons
might be in danger from this suspicious person, though her own was now
delivered out of his power. But she was very curious to know what
anybody could tell her of Walter's new possessions, and of the family
which it was rather humiliating to know so little about. It was she,
indeed, who had begun the conversation after his first remark upon
Walter's departure and the loss which would result to Sloebury.

"You know something about the Erradeens, my son tells me," she said
almost graciously.

"Something! I know about as much as most people. I knew he was the heir,
which few, except yourselves, did," the captain said. He cast a keen
glance at her when he said, "except yourselves."

"Indeed," said Mrs. Methven, "that is scarcely correct, for Walter did
not know, and I had forgotten. I had, indeed, lost sight of my husband's
family and the succession seemed so far off."

It was thus that she veiled her ignorance and endeavoured to make it
appear that indifference on her part, and a wise desire to keep Walter's
mind unaffected by such a dazzling possibility, had been her guiding
influence. She spoke with such modest gravity that Captain Underwood,
not used to delusion under that form, was tempted into a sort of belief.
He looked at her curiously, but her veil was down, and her artifice, if
it was an artifice, was of a kind more delicate than any to which he was
accustomed.

"Well!" he said, "then it was not such a surprise to you as people
thought? Sloebury has talked of nothing else, I need not tell you, for
several days; and everybody was of opinion that it burst upon you like a
thunderbolt."

"Upon my son, yes," Mrs. Methven said with a smile.

He looked at her again, and she had the satisfaction of perceiving that
this experienced man of the world was taken in.

"Well, then," he said, "you will join with me in wishing him well out of
it: you know all the stories that are about."

"I have never been at Mulmorrel--my husband's chances in his own
lifetime were very small, you know."

"It isn't Mulmorrel, it is that little ruined place where something
uncanny is always said to go on--oh, _I_ don't know what it is; nobody
does but the reigning sovereign himself, and some hangers-on, I suppose.
I have been there. I've seen the mysterious light, you know. Nobody can
ever tell what window it shows at, or if it is any window at all. I was
once with the late man--the late lord, he who died the other day--when
it came out suddenly. We were shooting wildfowl, and his gun fell out of
his hands. I never saw a man in such a funk. We were a bit late, and
twilight had come on before we knew."

"So then you actually saw something of it yourself?" Mrs. Methven said.
She had not the remotest idea what this was, but if she could find out
something by any means she was eager enough to take advantage of it.

"No more than that; but I can tell you this: Erradeen was not seen again
for twenty-four hours. Whether it was a call to him or what it was I
can't undertake to say. He never would stand any questioning about it.
He was a good fellow enough, but he never would put up with anything on
that point. So I can only wish Walter well through it, Mrs. Methven. In
my opinion he should have had some one with him; for he is young, and, I
dare say, he is fanciful."

"My son, Lord Erradeen," said Mrs. Methven with dignity, "is man enough,
I hope, to meet an emergency. Perhaps you think him younger than he is."
She propounded this delicately as, perhaps, a sort of excuse for the
presumption of the Christian name.

Underwood grew very red: he was disappointed and irritable. "Oh, of
course you know best," he said. "As for my Lord Erradeen (I am sure I
beg your pardon for forgetting his dignity), I dare say he is quite old
enough to take care of himself--at least, we'll hope so; but a business
of that kind will upset the steadiest brain, you know. Old Erradeen had
not a bad spirit of his own, and _he_ funked it. I confess I feel a
little anxious for your boy; he's a nice fellow, but he's nervous. I was
in a dozen minds to go up with him to stand by him; but, perhaps, it is
better not, for the best motives get misconstrued in this world. I can
only wish him well out of it," Captain Underwood said, taking off his
hat, and making her a fine bow as he stalked away.

It is needless to say that this mysterious intimation of danger planted
daggers in Mrs. Methven's heart. She stopped aghast: and for the moment
the idea of running back to the station, and signalling that the train
was to be stopped came into her mind. Ridiculous folly! Wish him well
out of it? What, out of his great fortune, his peerage, his elevation in
the world? Mrs. Methven smiled indignantly, and thought of the strange
manifestations under which envy shows itself. But she went home somewhat
pale, and could not dismiss it from her mind as she wished to do. Well
out of it! And there were moments when, she remembered, she had
surprised a very serious look on the countenance of Mr. Milnathort. Was
Walter going unwarned, in the elation and happy confidence of his heart,
into some danger unknown and unforeseen? This took her confidence away
from her, and made her nervous and anxious. But after all, what folly it
must be: something uncanny and a mysterious light! These were stories
for Christmas, to bring a laugh or a shiver from idle circles round the
fire. To imagine that they could effect anything in real life was a kind
of madness; an old-fashioned, exploded superstition. It was too
ridiculous to be worthy a thought.




CHAPTER VII.


Walter arrived in Edinburgh on a wintry morning white and chill. A sort
of woolly shroud wrapped all the fine features of the landscape. He
thought the dingy turrets of the Calton Jail were the Castle, and was
much disappointed, as was natural. Arthur's Seat and the Crags were as
entirely invisible as if they had been a hundred miles away, and the
cold crept into his very bones after his night's journey, although it
had been made luxuriously, in a way very different from his former
journeyings. Also it struck him as strange and uncomfortable that nobody
was aware of the change in his position, and that even the railway
porter, to whom he gave a shilling (as a commoner he would have been
contented with sixpence), only called him "Sir," and could not perceive
that it would have been appropriate to say my lord. He went to an hotel,
as it was so early, and found only a dingy little room to repose himself
in, the more important part of the house being still in the hands of the
housemaids. And when he gave his name as Lord Erradeen, the attendants
stared at him with a sort of suspicion. They looked at his baggage
curiously, and evidently asked each other if it was possible he could be
what he claimed to be. Walter had a half-consciousness of being an
impostor, and trying to take these surprised people in. He thawed,
however, as he ate his breakfast, and the mist began to rise, revealing
the outline of the Old Town. He had never been in Edinburgh before; he
had rarely been anywhere before. It was all new to him, even the sense
of living in an inn. There was a curious freedom about it, and
independence of all restraint, which pleased him. But it was very
strange to be absolutely unknown, to meet the gaze of faces he had never
seen before, and to be obliged always to explain who he was. It was
clear that a servant was a thing quite necessary to a man who called
himself by a title, a servant not so much to attend upon him as to
answer for him, and be a sort of guarantee to the world. Now that he was
here in Edinburgh, he was not quite sure what to do with himself. It was
too early to do anything. He could not disturb old Milnathort at such an
hour. He must let the old man get to his office and read his letters
before he could descend upon him. So that on the whole Walter, though
sustained by the excitement of his new position, was altogether chilled
and not at all comfortable, feeling those early hours of grim daylight
hang very heavily on his hands. He went out after he had refreshed and
dressed--and strolled about the fine but foreign street. It looked quite
foreign to his inexperienced eyes. The Castle soared vaguely through
the grey mist; the irregular line of roofs and spires crowning the ridge
threw itself up vaguely against a darker grey behind. There was a river
of mist between him and that ridge, running deep in the hollow,
underneath the nearer bank, which was tufted with spectral bushes and
trees, and with still more spectral white statues glimmering through. On
the other side of the street, more cheerful and apparent, were the
jewellers' shops full of glistening pebbles and national ornaments.
Everybody knows that it is not these shops alone, but others of every
luxurious kind, that form the glory of Prince's Street. But Walter was a
stranger and foreigner; and in the morning mists the shining store of
cairngorms was the most cheerful sight that met his eye.

Mr. Milnathort's office was in a handsome square, with a garden in the
centre of it, and another statue holding possession of the garden. For
the first time since he left home, Walter felt a little thrill of his
new importance when he beheld the respectful curiosity produced among
the clerks by the statement of his name. They asked his lordship to step
in with an evident sensation. And for Walter himself to look into that
office where his mother had so strongly desired that he should find a
place, had the most curious effect. He felt for the moment as if he were
one of the serious young men peeping from beyond the wooden railing that
inclosed the office, at the fortunate youth whose circumstances were no
different from their own. He did not realise at that moment the
unfailing human complacency which would have come to his aid in such
circumstances, and persuaded him that the gifts of fortune had nothing
to do with real superiority. He thought of the possible reflections upon
himself of the other young fellows in their lowly estate as if he had
himself been making them. He was sorry for them all, for the contrast
they must draw, and the strange sense of human inequality that they must
feel. He was no better than they were--who could tell? perhaps not half
as good. He felt that to feel this was a due tribute from Lord Erradeen
in his good fortune to those who might have been Walter Methven's
fellow-clerks, but who had never had any chance of being Lord Erradeen.
And then he thought what a good thing it was that he had never written
that letter to Mr. Milnathort, offering himself for a desk in the
office. He had felt really guilty on the subject at the time. He had
felt that it was miserable of him to neglect the occasion thus put
before him of gaining a livelihood. Self-reproach, real and
unmistakable, had been in his mind; and yet what a good thing he had not
done it: and how little one knows what is going to happen! These were
very ordinary reflections, not showing much depth; but it must be
recollected that Walter was still in a sort of primary state of feeling,
and had not had time to reach a profounder level.

Mr. Milnathort made haste to receive him, coming out of his own room on
purpose, and giving him the warmest welcome.

"I might have thought you would come by the night train. You are not old
enough to dislike night travelling as I do; but I will take it ill, and
so will my sister, if you stay in an hotel, and your room ready for you
in our little place. I think you will be more comfortable with us,
though we have no grandeur to surround you with. My sister has a great
wish to make your acquaintance, my Lord Erradeen. She has just a
wonderful acquaintance with the family, and it was more through her than
any one that I knew just where to put my hand upon you, when the time
came."

"I did not like to disturb you so early," Walter said.

"Well, perhaps there is something in that. We are not very early birds:
and as a matter of fact, Alison did not expect you till about seven
o'clock at night. And here am I in the midst of my day's work. But I'll
tell you what I'll do for you. We'll go round to the club, and there
your young lordship will make acquaintance with somebody that can show
you something of Edinburgh. You have never been here before? It is a
great pity that there is an easterly haar, which is bad both for you and
the objects you are wanting to see. However, it is lifting, and we'll
get some luncheon, and then I will put you in the way. That is the best
thing I can do for you. Malcolm, you will send down all the documents
relative to his lordship's affairs to Moray Place, this afternoon; and
you can tell old Symington to be in attendance in case Lord Erradeen
should wish to see him. That is your cousin the late lord's body
servant. He is a man of great experience, and you might wish--; but all
that can be settled later on. If Drysdales should send over about that
case of theirs, ye will say, Malcolm, that I shall be here not later
than three in the afternoon; and if old Blairallan comes fyking, ye can
say I am giving the case my best attention; and if it's that big
north-country fellow about his manse and his augmentation----"

"I fear that I am unpardonable," said Walter, "in interfering with your
valuable time."

"Nothing of the sort. It is not every day that a Lord Erradeen comes
into his inheritance; and as there are, may be, things not over-cheerful
to tell you at night, we may as well make the best of it in the
morning," said the old lawyer. He got himself into his coat as he spoke,
slowly, not without an effort. The sun was struggling through the mist
as they went out again into the streets, and the mid-day gun from the
Castle helped for a moment to disperse the haar, and show the noble
cliff on which it rears its head aloft. Mr. Milnathort paused to look
with tender pride along the line--the houses and spires lifting out of
the clouds, the sunshine breaking through, the crown of St. Giles's
hovering like a visible sign of rank over the head of the throned city,
awakened in him that keen pleasure and elation in the beauty of his
native place which is nowhere more warmly felt than in Edinburgh. He
waved his hand towards the Old Town in triumph. "You may have seen a
great deal, but ye will never have seen anything finer than that," he
said.

"I have seen very little," said Walter; "but everybody has heard of
Edinburgh, so that it does not take one by surprise."

"Ay, that is very wisely said. If it took you by surprise, and you had
never heard of it before, the world would just go daft over it. However,
it is a drawback of a great reputation that ye never come near it with
your mind clear." Having said this the old gentleman dismissed the
subject with a wave of his hand, and said, in a different tone, "You
will be very curious about the family secrets you are coming into, Lord
Erradeen."

Walter laughed.

"I am coming to them with my mind clear," he said. "I know nothing about
them. But I don't believe much in family secrets. They belong to the
middle ages. Nowadays we have nothing to conceal."

Mr. Milnathort listened to this blasphemy with a countenance in which
displeasure struggled with that supreme sense that the rash young man
would soon know better, which disarms reproof. He shook his head.

"You may say we can conceal but little," he said, "which is true enough,
but not altogether true either. Courage is a fine thing, Lord Erradeen,
and I am always glad to see it; and if you have your imagination under
control, that will do ye still better service. In most cases it is not
only what we see, but what we think we are going to see, that daunts us.
Keep you your head cool, that is your best defence in all emergencies.
It is better to be too bold than not to be bold enough, notwithstanding
the poet's warning to yon warrior-maid of his."

These last words made Walter stare, for he was not very learned in
poetry at the best, and was totally unprepared to hear Spenser from the
lips of the old Scottish lawyer. He was silent for a little in mere
perplexity, and then he said, with a laugh--

"You speak of danger as if we were on the eve of a battle. Are there
giants to encounter or magicians? One would think we were living in the
dark ages," Walter cried with a little impatience.

Mr. Milnathort said nothing more. He led the young man into one of the
great stone palaces which form the line of Prince's Street, and which
was then the seat of the old original club of Edinburgh society. Here
Walter found himself in the midst of a collection of men with marked and
individual faces, each one of whom ought to be somebody, he thought.
Many of them were bound about the throat with white ties, like
clergymen, but they did not belong to that profession. It gave the
young man a sense of his own importance, which generally deserted him in
Mr. Milnathort's presence, and of which he felt himself to stand in
need, to perceive that he excited a great deal of interest among these
grave and potent signors. There was a certain desire visible to make his
acquaintance and to ascertain his political opinions, of which Walter
was scarcely aware as yet whether he had any. It was suggested at once
that he should be put up for the club, and invitations to dinner began
to be showered upon him. He was stopped short in his replies to those
cordial beginnings of acquaintance by Mr. Milnathort, who calmly assumed
the guidance of his movements. "Lord Erradeen," he said, "is on his way
West. Business will not permit him to tarry at this moment. We hope he
will be back ere long, and perhaps stay a while in Edinburgh, and see
what is to be seen in the way of society." This summary way of taking
all control of his own movements from him astounded Walter so much that
he merely stared at his old tyrant or vizier, and in his confusion of
surprise and anger did not feel capable of saying anything, which, after
all, was the most dignified way; for, he said to himself, it was not
necessary to yield implicit obedience even if he refrained from open
protest upon these encroachments on his liberty. In the mean time it was
evident that the old lawyer did not intend him to have any liberty at
all. He produced out of the recesses of the club library a beaming
little man in spectacles, to whom he committed the charge of the young
stranger.

"Mr. Bannatyne," he said, "knows Edinburgh as well as I know my
chambers, and he will just take you round what is most worth seeing."

When Walter attempted to escape with a civil regret to give his new
acquaintance trouble he was put down by both with eagerness.

"The Old Town is just the breath of my nostrils," said the little
antiquary.

"It cannot be said that it's a fragrant breath," said old Milnathort;
"but since that is so, Lord Erradeen, you would not deprive our friend
of such a pleasure: and we'll look for you by five or six at Moray
Place, or earlier if you weary, for it's soon dark at this time of the
year."

To find himself thus arrested in the first day of his emancipation and
put into the hands of a conductor was so annoying yet so comic that
Walter's resentment evaporated in the ludicrous nature of the situation
and his consciousness that otherwise he would not know what to do with
himself. But sight-seeing requires a warmer inspiration than this, and
even the amusement of beholding his companion's enthusiasm over all the
dark entries and worn-out inscriptions was not enough to keep Walter's
interest alive. His own life at this moment was so much more interesting
than anything else, so much more important than those relics of a past
which had gone away altogether out of mortal ken. When the blood is at
high pressure in our veins, and the future lying all before us, it is
very difficult to turn back, and force our eager eyes into contemplation
of scenes with which we ourselves have little or no connection. The
antiquary, however, was not to be baulked. He looked at his young
companion with his head on one side like a critical bird. "You are
paying no attention to me," he said half pathetically; "but 'cod, man (I
beg your pardon, my lord!), ye _shall_ be interested before I'm done."
With this threat he hurried Walter along to the noisiest and most
squalid part of that noble but miserable street which is the pride of
Edinburgh, and stopped short before a small but deep doorway, entering
from a short flight of outside stairs. The door was black with age and
neglect, and showed a sort of black cave within, out of which all kind
of dingy figures were fluttering. The aspect of the muddy stairs and
ragged wayfarers was miserable enough, but the mouldings of the lintel,
and the spiral staircase half visible at one side, were of a grim
antiquity, and so was the lofty tenement above, with its many rows of
windows and high-stepped gable.

"Now just look here," said Mr. Bannatyne, "these arms will tell their
own story."

There was a projecting boss of rude, half-obliterated carving on the
door.

"I cannot make head nor tail of it," said the young man; his patience
was beginning to give way.

"Lord Erradeen," cried the other with enthusiasm, "this is worth your
fattest farm; it is of more interest than half your inheritance; it is
as historical as Holyrood. You are just awfully insensible, you young
men, and think as little of the relics that gave you your consequences
in the world--!" He paused a little in the fervour of his indignation,
then added--"But there are allowances to be made for you as you were
bred in England, and perhaps are little acquainted--My lord, this is
Me'even's Close, bearing the name even now in its decay. It was my Lord
Methven's lodging in the old time. Bless me! can your young eyes not
read the motto that many people have found so significant? Look here,"
cried Walter's cicerone, tracing with his stick the half-effaced
letters, "Baithe Sune and Syne."

Young Lord Erradeen began, as was natural, to feel ashamed of himself.
He felt a pang of discomfort too, for this certainly bore no resemblance
to the trim piece of modern Latin about the conquering power of virtue
which was on his father's seal. The old possibility that he might turn
out an impostor after all gleamed across his mind. "Does this belong to
me?" he added with some eagerness, to veil these other and less easy
sentiments.

"I know nothing about that," said Mr. Bannatyne with a slight tone of
contempt. "But it was the Lord of Methven's lodging in the days when
Scots lords lived in the Canongate of Edinburgh." Then he added, "There
is a fine mantelpiece up-stairs which you had better see. Oh nobody will
have any objection, a silver key opens every door hereabout. If it
should happen to be yours, my lord, and I were you," said the eager
little man, "I would clear out the whole clanjamfry and have it
thoroughly cleaned, and make a museum of the place. You would pick up
many a curious bit as the auld houses go down. This way, to the right,
and mind the hole in the wall. The doors are all carved, if you can see
them for the dirt, and you'll not often see a handsomer room."

It was confusing at first to emerge out of the gloom of the stairs into
the light of the great room, with its row of windows guiltless of either
blind or curtain, which was in possession of a group of ragged children,
squatting about in front of the deep, old-fashioned chimney, over which
a series of elaborate carvings rose to the roof. The room had once been
panelled, but half of the woodwork had been dragged down, and the rest
was in a deplorable state. The contrast of the squalor and wretchedness
about him, with the framework of the ancient, half-ruined grandeur, at
once excited and distressed Walter. There was a bed, or rather a heap of
something covered with the bright patches of an old quilt, in one
corner, in another an old corner cupboard fixed into the wall, a rickety
table and two chairs in the middle of the room. The solemn, unsheltered
windows, like so many hollow, staring eyes, gazed out through the cold
veil of the mist upon the many windows of an equally tall house on the
other side of the street, the view being broken by a projecting pole
thrust forth from the middle one, upon which some dingy clothes were
hanging to dry. The children hung together, getting behind the biggest
of them, a ragged, handsome girl, with wild, elf locks, who confronted
the visitors with an air of defiance. The flooring was broken in many
places, and dirty beyond description. Walter felt it intolerable to be
here, to breathe the stifling atmosphere, to contemplate this hideous
form of decay. He thought some one was looking at him from behind the
torn panels. "This is horrible," he said. "I hope I have nothing to do
with it." Disgust and a shivering, visionary dread was in his voice.

"Your race has had plenty to do with it," said the antiquary. "It was
here, they say, that the warlock-lord played most of his pliskies. It
was his 'warm study of deals' like that they made for John Knox on the
other side of the street. These walls have seen strange sights: and if
you believe in witchcraft, as one of your name ought----"

"Why should one of my name believe in witchcraft? It appears," he said,
with petulance, "that I know very little about my name."

"So I should have said," said the antiquary, dryly. "But no doubt you
have heard of your great ancestor, the warlock-lord? I am not saying
that I admire the character in the abstract; but an ancestor like that
is fine for a family. He was mixed up in all the doings of the time, and
he made his own out of every one of them. And then he's a grand
historical problem to the present day, which is no small distinction.
You never heard of that? Oh, my lord, that's just not possible! He was
the one whose death was never proved nor nothing about him, where he was
buried, or the nature of his end, or if he ever came to an end at all;
his son would never take the title, and forbade _his_ son to do it: but
by the time you have got to the second generation you are not minding so
much. I noticed that the late lord would never enter into conversation
on the subject. The family has always been touchy about it. It was the
most complete disappearance I can recollect hearing of. Most historical
puzzles clear themselves up in time: but this never was cleared up. Of
course it has given rise to legends. You will perhaps be more interested
in the family legends, Lord Erradeen?"

"Not at all," said Walter, abruptly. "I have told you I know very little
about the family. What is it we came to see?--not this wretched place
which makes me sick. The past should carry off its shell with it, and
not leave these old clothes to rot here."

"Oh!" cried little Mr. Bannatyne, with a shudder. "I never suspected I
was bringing in an iconoclast. That mantelpiece is a grand work of art,
Lord Erradeen. Look at that serpent twisted about among the
drapery--you'll not see such work now; and the ermine on that mantle
just stands out in every hair, for all the grime and the smoke. It is
the legend beneath the shield that is most interesting in the point of
view of the family. It's a sort of rhyming slogan, or rather it's an
addition to the old slogan, 'Live, Me'even,' which everybody knows."

Walter felt a mingled attraction and repulsion which held him there
undecided in front of the great old fireplace, like Hercules or any
other hero between the symbolical good and evil. He had a great
curiosity to know what all this meant mingled with an angry
disinclination impossible to put into words. Mr. Bannatyne, who of
course knew nothing of what was going on in his mind, took upon himself
the congenial task of tracing the inscription out. It was doggerel, bad
enough to satisfy every aspiration of an antiquary. It was as follows:--

    "Né fleyt atte Helle, né fond for Heeven,
                        Live, Me'even."

"You will see how it fits in with the other motto," cried the
enthusiast. "'Baithe Sune and Syne,' which has a grand kind of
indifference to time and all its changes that just delights me. And the
other has the same sentiment, 'Neither frightened for hell nor keen
about heaven.' It is the height of impiety," he said, with a subdued
chuckle; "but that's not inappropriate--it's far from inappropriate; it
is just, in fact, what might have been expected. The warlock lord----"

"I hope you won't think me ungrateful," cried Walter, "but I don't think
I want to know any more about that old ruffian. There is something in
the place that oppresses me." He took out from his pocket a handful of
coins. (It was with the pleasure of novelty that he shook them together,
gold and silver in one shining heap, and threw half a dozen of them to
the little group before the fire.) "For heaven's sake let us get out of
this!" he said, nervously. He could not have explained the sentiment of
horror, almost of fear, that was in his mind. "If it is mine," he said,
as they went down the spiral stair, groping against the black humid
wall, "I shall pull it down and let in some air and clear the filth
away."

"God bless me!" cried the antiquary in horror and distress, "you will
never do that. The finest street in Christendom, and one of the best
houses! No, no, Lord Erradeen, you will never do that!"

When Mr. Bannatyne got back to the club, he expressed an opinion of Lord
Erradeen, which we are glad to believe further experience induced him to
modify. He declared that old Bob Milnathort had given him such a handful
as he had not undertaken for years. "Just a young Cockney!" he said, "a
stupid Englishman! with no more understanding of history, or even of the
share his own race has had in it, than that collie dog--indeed, Yarrow
is far more intelligent, and a brute that is conscious of a fine
descent. I am not saying that there are not fine lads among some of
those English-bred young men, and some that have the sense to like
old-fashioned things. But this young fellow is just a Cockney, he is
just a young cynic. Pull down the house, said he? Spoil the first street
in Europe! We'll see what the Town Council--not to say the Woods and
Forests--will say to that, my young man! And I hope I have Bailie Brown
under my thumb!" the enraged antiquary cried.

Meantime Walter made his way through the dark streets in a tremor of
excitement and dislike of which he could give no explanation to himself.
Why should the old house have affected him so strongly! There was no
reason for it that he knew. Perhaps there was something in the
suddenness of the transition from the comfortable English prose of
Sloebury to all these old world scenes and suggestions which had a
disenchanting effect upon him. He had not been aware that he was more
matter of fact than another, less likely to be affected by romance and
historical associations. But so it had turned out. The grimy squalor of
the place, the bad atmosphere, the odious associations, had either
destroyed for him all the more attractive prejudices of long family
descent, and a name which had descended through many generations--or
else, something more subtle still, some internal influence, had
communicated that loathing and sickness of the heart. Which was it? He
could not tell. He said to himself, with a sort of scorn at himself,
that probably the bourgeois atmosphere of Sloebury had made him
incapable of those imaginative flights for which the highest and the
lowest classes have a mutual aptitude. The atmosphere of comfort and
respectability was against it. This idea rather exasperated him, and he
dwelt upon it with a natural perversity because he hated to identify
himself as one of that stolid middle class which is above or beneath
fanciful impulses. Then he began to wonder whether all this might not be
part of a deep-laid scheme on the part of old Milnathort to get him,
Walter, under his power. No doubt it was arranged that he should be
brought to that intolerable place, and all the spells of the past called
forth to subdue him by his imagination if never through his intellect.
What did they take him for? He was no credulous Celt, but a sober-minded
Englishman, not likely to let his imagination run away with him, or to
be led by the nose by any _diablerie_, however skilful. They might make
up their minds to it, that their wiles of this kind would meet with no
success. Walter was by no means sure who he meant by _they_, or why they
should endeavour to get him into their power; but he wanted something to
find fault with--some way of shaking off the burden of a mental weight
which he did not understand, which filled him with discomfort and new
sensations which he could not explain. He could almost have supposed
(had he believed in mesmerism, according to the description given of it
in fiction--) that he was under some mesmeric influence, and that some
expert, some adept, was trying to decoy him within some fatal circle of
impression. But he set his teeth and all his power of resistance against
it. They should not find him an easy prey.




CHAPTER VIII.


The drawing-room in Moray Place seemed in the partial gloom very large
and lofty. It must be remembered that Walter was accustomed only to the
comparatively small rooms of an English country town where there was
nobody who was very rich--and the solid, tall Edinburgh houses were
imposing to him. There was no light but that which came from a blazing
fire, and which threw an irregular ruddy illumination upon everything,
but no distinct vision. He saw the tall windows indefinitely draped, and
looking not unlike three colossal women in abundant vague robes standing
against the wall. In a smaller room behind, which opened from this, the
firelight was still brighter, but still only partially lit up the
darkness. It showed, however, a table placed near the fire, and glowing
with bright reflections from its silver and china; and just beyond that,
out of the depths of what looked like an elongated easy-chair, a piece
of whiteness, which was a female countenance. Walter, confused at his
entrance, made out after a moment that it was a lady, half reclining on
a sort of invalid _chaise longue_, who raised herself slightly to
receive him, with a flicker of a pair of white, attenuated hands. "You
are very welcome, Lord Erradeen," she said, in a sweet, feeble voice.
"Will you excuse my rising--for I'm a great invalid--and come and sit
down here beside me? I have been looking for you this half-hour past."
The hand which she held out to him was so thin that he scarcely felt its
light pressure. "If you have no objection," said Miss Milnathort, "we
will do with the firelight for a little longer. It is my favourite
light. My brother sent me word I was to expect you, and after your cold
walk you will be glad of a cup of tea." She did not pause for any reply,
but went on, drawing the table towards her, and arranging everything
with the skill of an accustomed hand. "I am just a cripple creature,"
she said. "I have had to learn to serve myself in this way, and Robert
is extraordinarily thoughtful. There is not a mechanical convenience
invented but I have it before it is well out of the brain that devised
it; and that is how I get on so well with no backbone to speak of. All
this is quite new to you," she said, quickly shaking off one subject and
taking up another, with a little swift movement of her head.

"Do you mean--Edinburgh, or----"

"I mean everything," said the lady. "Edinburgh will be just a bit of
scenery in the drama that is opening upon you, and here am I just
another tableau. I can see it all myself with your young eyes. You can
scarcely tell if it is real."

"That is true enough," said Walter, "and the scenery all turns upon the
plot so far: which is what it does not always do upon the stage."

"Ay!" said Miss Milnathort, with a tone of surprise, "and how may that
be? I don't see any particular significance in Holyrood. It is where all
you English strangers go, as if Edinburgh had no meaning but Queen
Mary."

"We did not go to Holyrood. We went to Lord Methven's Lodging, as I hear
it is called: which was highly appropriate."

"Dear me," said the lady, "do you mean to tell me that John Bannatyne
had that sense in him? I will remember that the next time Robert calls
him an auld foozle. And so you saw the lodging of Methven? I have never
seen it myself. Did it not make your heart sick to see all the poverty
and misery in that awful street? Oh yes, I'm told it's a grand street:
but I never have the heart to go into it. I think the place should die
with the age that gave it birth."

This was a sentiment so entirely unlike what Walter had expected to
hear, that for the moment it took from him all power of reply. "That
would be hard upon antiquity," he said at length, "and I don't know what
the artists would say, or our friend Mr. Bannatyne."

"He would have me burnt for a witch," the invalid said with a sweet
little laugh; and then she added, "Ah, it is very well to talk about
art; but there was great sense in that saying of the old Reformers,
'Ding down the nest, and the crows will flee away.'"

"I expected," said Walter, "to find you full of reverence for the past,
and faith in mysteries and family secrets, and--how can I tell?--ghosts
perhaps." He laughed, but the invalid did not echo his laugh. And this
brought a little chill and check to his satisfaction. The sense that one
has suddenly struck a jarring note is highly uncomfortable when one is
young. Walter put back his chair a little, not reflecting that the
firelight revealed very little of his sudden blush.

"I have had no experience in what you call ghosts," she said, gravely.
"I cannot, to tell the truth, see any argument against them, except just
that we don't see them; and I think that's a pity, for my part."

To this, as it was a view of the subject equally new to him, Walter made
no reply.

"Take you care, Lord Erradeen," she resumed hastily, "not to let
yourself be persuaded to adopt that sort of nomenclature." There was a
touch of Scotch in her accent that naturalised the long word, and made
it quite in keeping. "Conclude nothing to be a ghost till you cannot
account for it in any other way. There are many things that are far more
surprising," she said; then, shaking off the subject once more with that
little movement of her head, "You are not taking your tea. You must have
had a tiring day after travelling all night. That is one of the modern
fashions I cannot make up my mind to. They tell me the railway is not
so wearying as the long coach journeys we used to make in the old time."

"But you--can scarcely remember the old coach journeys? Why, my
mother----"

"Very likely I am older than your mother; and I rarely budge out of this
corner. I have never seen your mother, but I remember Captain Methven
long long ago, who was not unlike the general outline of you, so far as
I can make out. When the light comes you will see I am an old woman. It
is just possible that this is why I am so fond of the firelight," she
said with a laugh; "for I'm really very young though I was born long
ago. Robert and me, we remember all our games and plays in a way that
people that have had children of their own never do. We are just boy and
girl still, and I've known us, after a long talk, forget ourselves
altogether, and talk of papa and mamma!" She clapped her hands together
at this, and went into a peal of genuine laughter, such as is always
infectious. Walter laughed too, but in a half-embarrassed, half-unreal
way. All was so strange to him, and this curious introduction into a
half-seen, uncomprehended world the most curious of all.

"I would like to know a little about yourself," she resumed after a
moment. "You were not in the secret that it was you who were the kin? It
was strange your father should have left you in the dark."

"I can't remember my father," said Walter, hastily.

"That makes little difference; but you were always a strange family.
Now you, Robert tells me, you're not so very much of an Erradeen--you
take after your mother's side. And I'm very very glad to hear it. It
will perhaps be you, if you have the courage, that will put a stop
to--many things. There are old rhymes upon that subject, but you will
put little faith in old rhymes; I none at all. I believe they are just
made up long after the occasion, just for the sake of the fun, or
perhaps because some one is pleased with himself to have found a rhyme.
Now that one that they tell me is in the Canongate--that about 'Live,
Me'even--'"

"I thought you said you didn't know it?"

"I have never seen it; but you don't suppose I am ignorant of the
subject, Lord Erradeen? Do you know I have been here stretched out in my
chair these thirty years? and what else could I give my attention to,
considering all things? Well, I do not believe in that. Oh, it's far too
pat! When a thing is true it is not just so terribly in keeping. I
believe it was made up by somebody that knew the story just as we do;
probably a hundred years or more after the event."

Walter did not say that he was quite unacquainted with the event. His
interest perhaps, though he was not aware of it, was a little less warm
since he knew that Miss Milnathort was his mother's contemporary rather
than his own; but he had come to the conclusion that it was better not
to ask any direct questions. The light had faded much, and was now
nothing more than a steady red glow in place of the leaping and blazing
of the flames. He scarcely saw his entertainer at all. There were two
spots of brightness which moved occasionally, and which represented her
face and the hands which she had clasped together (when they were not
flickering about in incessant gesture) in her lap. But there was
something altogether quaint and strange in the situation. It did not
irritate him as the men had done. And then she had the good sense to
agree with him in some respects, though the _mélange_ of opinions in her
was remarkable, and he did not understand what she would be at. There
was an interval of quiet in which neither of them said anything, and
then a large step was audible coming slowly up-stairs, and through the
other drawing room.

"Here is Robert," the invalid said with a smile in her voice. It was
nothing but a tall shadow that appeared, looming huge in the ruddy
light.

"Have you got Lord Erradeen with you, Alison? and how are you and he
getting on together?" said old Milnathort's voice.

Walter rose hastily to his feet with a feeling that other elements less
agreeable were at once introduced, and that his pride was affronted by
being discussed in this easy manner over his head.

"We are getting on fine, Robert. He is just as agreeable as you say, and
I have great hopes will be the man. But you are late, and it will soon
be time for dinner. I would advise you to show our young gentleman to
his room, and see that he's comfortable. And after dinner, when you
have had your good meal, we'll have it all out with him."

"I am thinking, Alison, that there is a good deal we must go over that
will be best between him and me."

"That must be as you please, Robert, my man," said the lady, and Walter
felt like a small child who is being discussed over his head by grown-up
persons, whom he feels to be his natural enemies. He rose willingly, yet
with unconscious offence, and followed his host to his room, inwardly
indignant with himself for having thus impaired his own liberty by
forsaking his inn. The room however was luxuriously comfortable, shining
with firelight, and a grave and respectable servant in mourning, was
arranging his evening clothes upon the bed.

"This is Symington," said Mr. Milnathort, "he was your late
cousin's body-servant. The late Lord Erradeen gave him a very warm
recommendation. There might be things perhaps in which he would be of
use."

"Thanks," said Walter, impulsively. "I have a man coming. I am afraid
the recommendation is a little too late."

This unfortunately was not true; but the young man felt that to allow
himself to be saddled with a sort of governor in the shape of the late
lord's servant was more than could be required of him; and that he must
assert himself before it was too late.

"You will settle that at your pleasure, my lord," said old Milnathort,
and he went away shutting the door carefully, his steady, slow step
echoing along the passage. The man was not apparently in the least
daunted by Walter's irritation. He went on mechanically, lightly
brushing out a crease, and unfolding the coat with that affectionate
care which a good servant bestows upon good clothes. Walter longed to
have brought his old coat with him that everything should not have been
so distressingly new.

"That will do," he said, "that will do. It is a pity to give you so much
trouble when, as I tell you, I have another man engaged."

"It is no trouble, my lord; it is a pleasure. I came out of attachment
to the family. I've been many years about my late lord. And however ye
may remind yourself that you are but a servant, and service is no
heritage, yet it's not easy to keep yourself from becoming attached."

"My good man," said Walter, half impatient, half touched, "you never saw
me in your life before. I can't see how you can have any attachment to
me."

Symington had a long face, with a somewhat lugubrious expression,
contradicted by the twinkle of a pair of humorous, deep-set eyes. He
gave a glance up at Walter from where he stood fondling the lappels of
the new coat.

"There are many kinds of attachments, my lord," he said oracularly;
"some to the person and some to the race. For a number of years past I
have, so to speak, just identified myself with the Erradeens. It's not
common in England, so far as I can hear, but it's just our old Scots
way. I will take no other service. So, being free, if your lordship
pleases, I will just look after your lordship's things till the other
man comes."

Walter perceived in a moment by the way Symington said these words that
he had no faith whatever in the other man. He submitted accordingly to
the ministrations of the family retainer, with a great deal of his old
impatience, tempered by a sense of the humour of the situation. It
seemed that he was never to have any control over himself. He had barely
escaped from the tutelage of home when he fell into this other which was
much more rigid. "Poor mother!" he said to himself, with an affectionate
recollection of her many cares, her anxious watchfulness; and laughed to
himself at the thought that she was being avenged.

Mr. Milnathort's table was handsome and liberal; the meal even too
abundant for the solitary pair who sat alone at a corner of the large
table, amid a blaze of light. Miss Milnathort did not appear.

"She never comes down. She has never sat down at table since she had her
accident, and that is thirty years since."

There was something in Mr. Milnathort's tone as he said this that made
Walter believe that her accident too had something to do with the
family. Everything tended towards that, or sprang from it. Had he been
to the manner born, this would no doubt have seemed to him natural
enough; but as it was he could not keep himself from the idea either
that he was being laughed at, or that some design was hidden beneath
this constant reference. The dinner, however, went off quietly. It was
impossible to discuss anything of a private character in the presence of
Milnathort's serious butler, and of the doubly grave apparition of
Symington, who helped the other to wait.

Walter had never dined so solemnly before. It must be added, however,
that he had seldom dined so well. It was a pity that he was so little
knowing in this particular. Mr. Milnathort encouraged him through the
repast by judicious words of advice and recommendation. He was very
genial and expansive at this most generous moment of the day. Fond of
good fare himself he liked to communicate and recommend it, and Walter's
appetite was excellent, if perhaps his taste was uncultivated. The two
noiseless attendants circulating about the table served them with a
gravity in perfect keeping with the importance of the event, which was
to the old lawyer the most interesting of the day.

When they were left alone finally, the aspect of affairs changed a
little. Mr. Milnathort cleared his throat, and laid aside his napkin. He
said--

"We must not forget, Lord Erradeen, that we have a great deal of
business to get through. But you have had a fatiguing day, and probably
very little sleep last night"--

"I slept very well, I assure you," Walter replied cheerfully.

"Ay, ay, you are young," said Mr. Milnathort, with a half-sigh. "Still
all the financial statements, and to give you a just view of all that's
coming to you, will take time. With your permission we'll keep that till
to-morrow. But there's just a thing or two--. Lord save us!" he cried
suddenly, "you're not the kind of person for this. There is many a one I
know that would have liked it all the better--till they knew--for what's
attached to it. I thought as much when I first set eyes upon you. This
will be one that will not take it all for gospel, I said to myself--one
that will set up his own judgment, and demand the reason why."

Walter, a little uncertain at first how to take this, ended by being
gratified with such an estimate of himself. It showed, he felt, more
perception than he had looked for, and he answered, with a little
complacency, "I hope you think that is the right way of approaching a
new subject."

"I am not unbiased myself," said the lawyer, "and I have had to do with
it all my life. There are conditions connected with your inheritance,
Lord Erradeen, that may seem out of the way to a stranger. If you had
succeeded in the way of nature, as your father's son, they would not
have been new to you, and you would have been prepared. In that way it
is hard upon you. There was one of your ancestors that laid certain
conditions, as I was saying, upon every heir. He was one that had, as
you may say, a good right to do that, or whatever else he pleased,
seeing he was the making of the family. In old days it was no more than
a bit small highland lairdship. It was he that gave it consequence; but
he has held a heavy hand upon his successors ever since."

"Would it be he by any chance of whom Mr. Bannatyne was discoursing to
me," said Walter, "under the title of the warlock-lord?"

"Ah! John Bannatyne took that upon him?" cried Mr. Milnathort with
vivacity. His eyes gleamed from under his deep-set brows. "The less a
man knows the more ready he is to instruct the world: but I never
thought he would take that upon him. So you see, as I was saying, there
are certain formalities to go through. It is understood that once a
year, wherever he may be, Lord Erradeen should pass, say a week, say two
or three days, in the old castle of Kinloch Houran, which is the old
seat of the family, the original of the Methven race."

Walter had been listening with some anxiety. He drew a long breath as
Mr. Milnathort came to a pause. "Is that all?" he cried, with a voice of
relief. Then he laughed. "I was winding myself up to something heroic,
but if it is only a periodical retirement to an old castle--to think, I
suppose, upon one's sins and examine one's conscience----"

"Something very like that," said the old man, somewhat grimly.

"Well! It might be a great inconvenience; but there is nothing very
appalling in the prospect, if that is all."

"It is all, Lord Erradeen--if ye except what passes there, a thing that
is your own concern, and that I have never pried into for my part. And
just this beside, that you are expected there at once and without
delay."

"Expected--at once and without delay." Walter grew red with anger at
these peremptory words. "This sounds a little arbitrary," he said.
"Expected? by whom? and to what purpose? I don't understand----"

"Nor do I, my young lord. But it's so in the documents, and so has it
been with every Lord of Erradeen up to this period. It is the first
thing to be done. Before you come into enjoyment of anything, or take
your place in the country, there is this visit--if you like to call it a
visit: this--sojourn: not a long one, at least, you may be thankful--to
be made----"

"To what purpose?" Walter repeated, almost mechanically. He could not,
himself, understand the sudden tempest of resistance, of anger, of alarm
that got up within him. "There is reason in everything," he said,
growing pale. "What is it for? What am I to do?"

"Lord Erradeen, a minute since you said, was that all? And now you
change colour: you ask why, and wherefore--"

Walter made a great effort to regain command of himself. "It is
inconsistent, I allow," he said. "Somehow, the order to go now is
irritating and unpleasant. I suppose it's simple enough, a piece of
tyranny such as people seem to think they may indulge in after they're
dead. But it is abominably arbitrary and tyrannical. What good does the
old beggar think----"

"Hold your peace," cried Mr. Milnathort, with a little trepidation. "We
have no right to call names, and I would not like it to be thought----"
Here he paused with a sort of uneasy smile, and added, "I am speaking
nonsense," with a vague glance about him. "I think we might join my
sister up-stairs; and, as she knows just as much as I do, or, maybe,
more, you can speak as freely as you please before her--oh, quite
freely. But, my dear young lord, call no names!" cried Mr. Milnathort.
He got up hurriedly, leaving his wine which he had just filled out, a
demonstration of sincerity which made a great impression upon Walter:
and threw open the door. "Putting off the business details till
to-morrow, I know nothing else that we cannot discuss before Alison," he
said.

Walter was much startled when he went back to the inner drawing-room and
found it lighted. Miss Milnathort did not employ any of those devices by
which light is softened to suit the exigencies of beauty which has
passed its prime. The light (alas for the prejudices of the æsthetic
reader) was gas; and, though it was slightly disguised by means of opal
glass, it still poured down in a brilliant flood, and the little room
was almost as light as day. She lay in her _chaise longue_ placed under
this illumination. Her face was preternaturally young, almost childish,
small, and full of colour, her hair snow-white. She seemed to have been
exempted from the weight of years, in compensation, perhaps, for other
sufferings; her skin was smooth and unwrinkled, her eyes full of dewy
brightness like those of a girl. Her dress, so far as it was visible,
was white, made of cashmere or some other woollen material, solid and
warm, but with lace at the neck, and pretty ribbons breaking the
monotony of the tint. She looked like a girl dressed for some simple
party, who had lain there waiting for the little festivity to begin, for
no one could imagine how many years. Her hands were soft and round and
young like her face. The wind had not been allowed to visit her cheek
too roughly for a lifetime. What had happened before the event which she
and her brother had both referred to as her "accident" belonged to a
period which had evidently nothing to do with the present. Walter saw at
a glance that every possible convenience which could be invented for an
invalid surrounded her. She had a set of bookshelves at one side with
vacant spaces where she could place the book she was reading. Tables
that wheeled towards her at a touch, with needlework, with knitting,
with drawing materials, were arranged within reach. One of these made
into a desk and put itself across her couch by another adaptation. It
was evident that the tenderest affection and care had made this prison
of hers into a sort of museum of every ingenuity that had ever been
called to the help of the suffering. She lay, or rather sat, for that
was her general position, with an air of pleasant expectation on her
face, and received them with smiles and hands held out. "Come away,
come away," she said in her soft Scotch. "I have been wearying for you."
Walter thought there was something of age in her voice, but that might
have been only the Scotch, and the unusual form of her salutation. She
pointed out a chair to him carefully placed for her convenience in
seeing and hearing. "Come and tell me what you think about it all," she
said.

"I have not heard much," said Walter, "to think about: except that I am
to go away directly, which does not please me at all, Miss Milnathort."

"Oh, you will come back, you will come back," she said.

"I hope so: but the reason why I should go doesn't seem very plain. What
would happen, I wonder, if I didn't?" Walter said, lightly. He was
surprised to see how much effect was produced upon his companions by
this very simple utterance. Miss Milnathort put her hands together, as
if to clasp them in triumph. Her brother stood looking down upon the
others, with his back to the light, and an air of alarmed displeasure.

"One result would be that certain of the lands would pass to the next
heir," he said; "besides, perhaps--other penalties: that I would not
incur, Lord Erradeen, if I were you."

"What penalties? But do you think at this time of day," said Walter,
"that ridiculous conditions of this kind that can mean nothing could
really be upheld by the law--now that bequests of all kinds are being
interfered with, and even charities?"

"Robert, that is true. There was the Melville mortification that you had
so much trouble about, and that was a charity. How much more, as young
Lord Erradeen is saying, when it is just entirely out of reason."

"You should hold your peace on legal subjects, Alison. What can you know
about them? I disapprove of all interference with the will of a
testator, Lord Erradeen. I hold it to be against the law, and against
that honour and honesty that we owe to the dead as well as the living.
But there has always been a license allowed in respect to charities. So
far as they are intended to be for the good of the poor, we have a right
to see that the testator's meaning is carried out, even if it be
contrary to his stipulations. But in a private case there is no such
latitude. And you must always respect the testator's meaning, which is
very clear in this case, as even you will allow, Alison."

"Ay, clear enough," cried the young-old lady, shaking her white head.
"But I'm on your side, Lord Erradeen. I would just let them try their
worst, and see what would come of it, if, instead of a lame woman, I was
a young man, lively and strong like you."

"The question is," said Walter, "for I have become prudent since I have
had property--whether for such an insignificant affair it is worth while
losing a substantial advantage, as Mr. Milnathort says? And then,
perhaps, a new man like myself, coming into an antiquated routine, there
would be a sort of discourtesy, a want of politeness--" He laughed. "One
ought, I suppose, to be on one's best behaviour in such circumstances,"
he said.

Miss Milnathort's countenance fell a little. She did not make any reply;
but she had been listening with an air so eager and full of vivacity,
anxious to speak, that the young man at once perceived the
disappointment in her expressive little face. He said quickly--

"That does not please you? What would you have me to do?" with an
involuntary sense that she had a right to an opinion.

Mr. Milnathort at this moment sat heavily down on the other side, giving
great emphasis to his interruption by the sound of his chair drawn
forward, a sound which she protested against with a sudden contraction
of her forehead, putting up a delicate hand.

"I beg your pardon, my dear, for making a noise. You must not consult
Alison, Lord Erradeen; she is prejudiced on one side--and I--perhaps I
am, if not prejudiced, yet biased, on the other. You must act on your
own instinct, which, as far as I can judge, is a just one. It would be a
great incivility, as you say, for a far-away collateral, that is really
no more than a stranger, to set himself against the traditions of a
house."

Walter did not much like to hear himself described as a far-away
collateral. It sounded like a term of reproach, and as he did not
choose to say anything more on this matter, he made the best change of
subject he could.

"I wonder," he said, "what would happen with any of the fantastic old
feudal tenures if a new heir, a new man like myself, should simply
refuse to fulfil them."

"Mostly they take a pride and a pleasure in fulfilling them," said the
old lawyer.

"But suppose," cried Walter, "for the sake of argument, that a new Duke
of Marlborough should say, 'What rubbish! Why should I send that
obsolete old flag to Windsor?' That is a modern instance; or
suppose----"

"Just that," cried Miss Milnathort, striking in with a flicker of her
pretty hands. "Suppose young Glenearn should refuse when he comes of age
to hear a word about that secret cha'mer----"

"What would happen?" said Walter, with a laugh of profane and irreverent
youth.

Mr. Milnathort rose to his full height; he pushed back his chair with an
indignant movement.

"You may as well ask me," he said, "what would happen if the pillars of
the earth should give way. It is a thing that cannot be, at least till
the end of all things is at hand. I will ring for prayers, Alison. My
Lord Erradeen is young; he knows little; but this kind of profane talk
is not to be justified from you and me."

Then the bell was rung; the servants came trooping up-stairs, and
Symington gave Walter a sidelong look as he took his seat behind their
backs. It seemed to assert a demure claim of proprietorship, along with
a total want of faith in the "other man." Young Lord Erradeen found that
it was all he could do to restrain an irreverent laugh. The position was
so comic, that his original sense of angry resistance disappeared before
it. He was going off against his will to pass through a mysterious
ordeal in an old ruined house, under charge of a servant whom he did not
want, and in obedience to a stipulation which he disowned. He was not
half so free an agent as he had been when he was poor Walter Methven,
knocking about the streets of Sloebury and doing much what he liked,
though he thought himself in bondage. Bondage! he did not know in the
old days what the word would mean.




CHAPTER IX.


The day on which Walter set out for Kinloch Houran was fine and bright,
the sky very clear, the sun shining, the hills standing out against the
blue, and every line of the tall trees clearly marked upon the
transparent atmosphere. It was not till two days after the conversation
above recorded--for there had been much to explain, and Walter was so
little acquainted with business that instructions of various kinds were
necessary. Miss Milnathort was visible much earlier than usual on the
morning of his departure, and he was admitted to see her. She was paler
than before, and her little soft face was full of agitation; the corners
of her mouth turned down, and her upper lip, which was a trifle too
long, quivering. This added rather than took away from her appearance of
youth. She was like a child who had exhausted itself with crying, and
still trembled with an occasional sob. She stretched up her arms to him
as if she would have put them round his neck, and bade God bless him
with a tremulous voice.

"You must have plenty of courage," she said; "and you must never, never
give up your own way."

Walter was touched to the heart by this look of trouble on the innocent,
young-old face.

"I thought it was always right to give up one's own way," he said, in
the light tone which he had come to employ with her.

She made an effort to smile in response.

"Oh yes, oh yes, it's the fashion to say so. You are a self-denying
race, to believe yourselves; but this time you must not yield."

"To whom am I supposed to be about to yield?" he asked. "You may be sure
I sha'n't unless I can't help myself."

The tears overflowed her bright old eyes; her hands shook as they held
his.

"God bless you! God bless you!" she said. "I will do nothing but pray
for you, and you will tell me when you come back."

He left her lying back upon her cushions sobbing under her breath. All
this half-perplexed, half-amused the young man. She was a very strange
little creature, he felt, neither old nor young; there was no telling
the reason of her emotion. She was so much indulged in all her whims,
like a spoiled child, that perhaps these tears were only her regrets for
a lost playmate. At the same time Walter knew that this was not so, and
was angry with himself for the thought. But how find his way out of the
perplexity? He shook it off, which is always the easiest way; and soon
the landscape began to attract his attention, and he forgot by degrees
that there was anything very unusual in the circumstances of his
journey. It was not till the first long stage of this journey was over
that he was suddenly roused to a recollection of everything involved, by
the appearance of Symington at the carriage window, respectfully
requesting to know whether he had wanted anything. Walter had not
remembered, or if he had remembered had thought no more of it, that this
quietly officious retainer had taken all trouble from him at the
beginning of his journey, as he had done during his stay in Mr.
Milnathort's house.

"What! are you here?" he said, with surprise, and a mixture of amusement
and offence.

"I beg your pardon, my lord," said Symington, with profound and serious
respect, yet always a twinkle in his eye, "but as the other man did not
turn up--and your lordship could scarcely travel without some
attendance----"

He had to rush behind to get his place in the train in the midst of his
sentence, and Walter was left to think it over alone. In the balance
between anger and amusement the latter fortunately won the day. The
comic side of the matter came uppermost. It seemed to him very droll
that he should be taken possession of, against his will, by the valet
who professed an attachment to the race, not to the individual members
of it, whose head was garlanded with crape in the quaint Scotch way for
Walter's predecessor, and who had "identified himself with the
Erradeens." He reminded himself that he was in the country of Caleb
Balderstone and Ritchie Moniplies, and he resigned himself to
necessity. Symington's comic yet so respectful consciousness that "the
other man" was a mere imagination, was joke enough to secure his pardon,
and Walter felt that though the need of attendance was quite new in his
life, that it might be well on his arrival in a strange country and a
lonely ruined house, to have some one with him who was not ignorant
either of the locality or the household.

The country increased in interest as he went on, and by and by he forgot
himself in gazing at the mountains which appeared in glimpses upon the
horizon, then seemed to draw nearer, closing in upon the road, which led
along by the head of one loch after another, each encompassed by its
circle of hills. Walter knew very little about Scotland. He thought it a
barren and wild country, all bleak and gloomy, and the lavish vegetation
of the west filled him with surprise and admiration. The sun was near
its setting when the railway journey came to an end, and he found
himself at a village station, from which a coach ran to Kinloch Houran.
It appeared that there was no other vehicle to be had, and though it was
cold there was nothing else for it but to clamber up on the top of the
rude coach, which was a sort of _char-à-banc_ without any interior.
Walter felt that it would become him ill, notwithstanding his new rank,
to grumble at the conveyance, upon which there mounted nimbly a girl
whom he had remarked when leaving Edinburgh, and whom he had watched for
at all the pauses of the journey. He thought her the very impersonation
of all he had ever heard of Scotch beauty, and so would most observers
to whom Scotland is a new country. The native Scot is aware that there
are as many brown locks as golden, and as many dark maidens as fair ones
in his own country; but notwithstanding, to the stranger it is the fair
who is the type. This young lady was warmly clothed in dark tweed, of
the ruddy heathery hue which is now so general, not long enough to
conceal her well-shod feet, closely fitting, and adapted for constant
walking and movement. She seemed to be met by friends all along the
route. From the carriage window Walter saw her look out with little
cries of pleasure. "Oh, is that you, Jack?" "Oh, Nelly, where are you
going?" "Oh, come in here, there is room in this carriage," and such
like. She was always leaning out to say a word to somebody, either of
farewell or welcome. "You will remember me to your mother," old
gentlemen would call to her, as the train went on. Walter was greatly in
want of amusement, and he was at the age when a girl is always
interesting. She became to him the heroine of the journey. He felt that
he was collecting a great deal of information about her as they
travelled on, and had begun to wonder whether he should ever find out
who she was, or see any more of her, when he perceived her, to his
delight, getting out, as he himself did, at Baldally. She was met by a
respectable woman servant, who took possession of her baggage, while the
young lady herself ran across the road to the coach, and with a hearty
greeting to John the coachman darted up to the seat immediately behind
him, where her maid presently joined her. Walter, and a personage of the
commercial traveller class, shared the coachman's seat in front, and
Symington and some other humbler passengers sat behind. The coach was
adapted for summer traffic, so that there were several lines of empty
seats between the two sets of travellers. It gave Walter a great deal of
pleasure to hear the soft voice of his fellow-traveller pouring forth,
low yet quite audible, an account of her journey to her maid, who was
evidently on the most confidential terms with her young mistress.

"Has mamma missed me--much?" she asked after the little Odyssey was
over.

"Oh, Miss Oona, to ask that," cried the woman; "how should we no miss
you?" and then there ensued a number of details on the home side. The
girl had been on a visit in Edinburgh, and had gone to balls, and "seen
everything." On the other hand many small matters, faithfully reported,
had filled up the time of separation. Walter listened to all this
innocent interchange with great amusement and interest as the coach made
its way slowly up the ascents of the hilly road. It was not in itself an
agreeable mode of progression: the wind was icy cold, and swept through
and through the unfortunates who faced it in front, sharpening into
almost absolute needle points of ice when the pace quickened, and the
noisy, jolting vehicle lumbered down the further side of a hill,
threatening every moment to pitch the passengers into the heathery bog
on one side or the other. He tried to diminish his own discomfort by the
thought that he took off the icy edge of the gale and sheltered the
little slim creature in her close ulster behind, about whose shoulders
the maid had wound the snowy mass of a great white knitted shawl. The
low sun was in their faces as they toiled and rattled along, and the
clear wintry blue of the sky was already strewn with radiant rosy masses
of cloud. When they reached the highest point of the road the dazzling
gleam of the great loch lying at their feet and made into a mirror of
steel by the last blaze of the sun before it disappeared, dazzled the
young man, who could see nothing except the cold intolerable brightness;
but in a moment more the scene disclosed itself. Hills all purple in the
sunset, clothed with that ineffable velvet down which softens every
outline, opened out on either side, showing long lines of indistinct
green valleys and narrower ravines that ran between, all converging
towards the broad and noble inland sea fringed with dark woods and
broken with feathery islands, which was the centre of the landscape. The
wonderful colour of the sky reflected in the loch, where everything
found a reflection, and every knoll and island floated double, changed
the character of the scene and neutralised the dazzling coldness of the
great water-mirror. Walter's involuntary exclamation at this sight
stopped for a moment all the conversation going on. "By Jove," he said,
"how glorious!" They all stopped talking, the coachman, the traveller,
the woman behind, and looked at him. Big John the driver, who knew
everybody, eyed him with a slightly supercilious air, as one who felt
that the new-comer could not be otherwise than contemptible, more or
less, even though his sentiments were irreproachable. "Ay, sir--so
that's your opinion? most folk have been beforehand with ye," said John.

The commercial traveller added, condescendingly, "It is cold weather for
touring, sir; but it's a grand country, as ye say." And then they
resumed their conversation.

The young lady behind was far more sympathetic. She made a distinct
pause, and when she spoke again it was with a flattering adoption of
Walter's tone to point out to her companion how beautiful the scene was.

"The isle is floating too, Mysie--look! If we could get there soon
enough we might land upon one of those rosy clouds."

Walter gave a grateful glance behind him, and felt that he was
understood.

"That is just your poetry, Miss Oona," said the maid; "but, bless me, I
have never told ye: there has been the light lighted in the castle these
two nights past. We have just thought upon you all the time, and how
much taken up you would be about it, your mamma and me."

"The light on the castle!" cried the young lady; and at this the
coachman, turning slightly round, entered into the conversation.

"That has it," he said; "I can back her up in that; just as clear and as
steady as a star. There are many that say they never can see it; but
they would be clever that had not seen it these two past nights."

"Who says they cannot see it?" said the girl, indignantly.

John gave a little flick to his leader, which made the whole machine
vibrate and roll.

"Persons of the newfangled kind that believe in nothing," he said. "They
will tell ye it cannot be--so how can you see it? though it is glinting
in their faces all the time."

"You are meaning me, John," said the traveller on the box-seat; "and
there's truth in what you say. I've seen what you call the light, and no
doubt it has the appearance of a light; but if ye tell me it's something
supernatural, there can be no doubt I will answer ye that there's
nothing supernatural. If you were to tell me ye had seen a ghost, I
would just reply in the same way. No, my man, I'm not impeachin' your
veracity. You saw something, I'll allow; but no' a ghost, for there are
no ghosts to see."

"That's just an awfu' easy way of settlin' the question," said the maid
from behind--and then she went on in a lower tone: "This will be the
third night since it began, and we've a' seen it on the Isle. Hamish,
he says the new lord maun be of a dour kind to need so many warnings.
And he's feared ill will come of it; but I say the new lord, no' bein'
here away nor of this country at all, how is he to ken?"

The girl's voice was now quite low, almost a whisper: but Walter being
immediately in front of her could still hear. "Has anything been heard,"
she said, "of the new lord?"

"Very little, Miss Oona, only that he's a young lad from the south with
no experience, and didna even know that he was the heir; so how could he
ken? as I say to Hamish. But Hamish he insists that it's in the blood,
and that he would ken by instinck; and that it shows an ill-will, and
ill will come of it."

"If I were he," cried the girl, "I would do the same. I would not be
called like that from the end of the world wherever I was."

"Oh, whisht, Miss Oona. It is such an auld, auld story; how can the like
of you say what should be done?"

"I would like myself," said the traveller, "to come to the bottom of
this business. What is it for, and who has the doing of it? The moment
you speak of a light ye pre-suppose a person that lights it and mainy
adjuncks and accessories. Now there's nobody, or next to nobody, living
in that auld ruin. It's some rendeyvouss, I can easily understand that.
The days of conspiracies are gone by, or I would say it was something
against the state; but whatever it is, it must have a purpose, and
mortal hands must do it, seeing there are no other. I have heard since
ever I began to travel this country of the Kinloch Houran light, but I
never heard a reason assigned."

"It's the living lord," cried the maid, "as everybody knows! that is
called to meet with----"

Here the young lady interfered audibly--

"Mysie, not a word!" The woman's voice continued, stifled as if a hand
had been laid on her mouth.

"With them that are--with ane that is--I'm saying nothing, Miss Oona,
but what all the loch is well aware----"

"It's just a ferlie of this part of the world," said John the driver;
"nae need of entering into it with them that believe naething. I'm no
what ye call credulous mysel'; but when it comes to the evidence of a
man's ain senses----"

"And what have your senses said to ye, my fine fellow? that there's a
queer kind of a glimmer up upon the auld tower? So are there
corpse-candles, if I'm not mistaken, seen by the initiated upon your
burial isle--what do you call it?"

"And wha has a word to say gainst that?" cried the driver angrily;
whilst Mysie behind murmured--"It's well seen ye have naething to do
with any grave there."

Now Walter was as entirely free from superstition as any young man need
be; but when he heard the laugh with which the sceptic greeted these
protests, he had the greatest mind in the world to seize him by the
collar and pitch him into the bog below. Why? but the impulse was quite
unreasonable and defied explanation. He had as little faith in
corpse-candles as any bagman ever had, and the embarrassed and uneasy
consciousness he had that the end of his journey was inexplicable, and
its purpose ridiculous, led him much more to the conclusion that he was
being placed in a ludicrous position, than that there was anything
solemnly or awfully mysterious in it. Nevertheless, so far from ranging
himself upon the side of the enlightened modern who took the
common-sense view of these Highland traditions, his scorn and impatience
of him was beyond words. For his own part he had not been sufficiently
self-possessed to join in the discussion; but at this moment he ventured
a question--

"Is this old castle you speak of--" here he paused not knowing how to
shape his inquiry; then added, "uninhabited?" for want of anything
better to say.

"Not altogether," said John; "there is auld Macalister and his wife that
live half in the water, half out of the water. And it's the story in the
parish that there are good rooms; aye ready for my lord. But I can tell
ye naething about that, for I'm always on the road, and I see nothing
but a wheen tourists in the summer, that are seeking information, and
have none to give, puir creatures. There's a new lord just come to the
title; ye will maybe have met with him if ye're from the south, for he's
just an English lad."

"England, my man John, is a wide road," said the traveller; "there are
too many for us all to know each other as ye do in a parish; this
gentleman will tell ye that."

John's satirical explanation that he had not suspected Mr. Smith, whose
northern accent was undoubted, of being an Englishman, saved Walter from
any necessity of making a reply; and by this time the coach was rattling
down upon a little homely inn, red-roofed and white-walled, which stood
upon a knoll, overlooking the loch, and was reflected in all its
brightness of colour in that mirror. The ground shelved rapidly down to
the water-side, and there were several boats lying ready to put out into
the loch--one a ponderous ferry boat, another a smaller, but still
substantial and heavy, cobble, in which a man with a red shirt and
shaggy locks was standing up relieved against the light. Walter jumped
down hurriedly with the hope of being in time to give his hand to the
young lady, who perhaps had divined his purpose, for she managed to
alight on the other side and so balk him. The landlady of the little inn
had come out to the door, and there was a great sound of salutations and
exclamations of welcome. "But I mustna keep you, Miss Oona, and your
mamma countin' the moments; and there's two or three parcels," the woman
said. The air had begun to grow a little brown, as the Italians say,
that faint veil of gathering shade which is still not darkness, was
putting out by degrees the radiance of the sky, and as Walter stood
listening all the mingled sounds of the arrival rose together in a
similar mist of sound, through which he sought for the soft little
accents of the young lady's voice amid the noises of the unharnessing,
the horses' hoofs and ostler's pails, and louder tones. Presently he saw
her emerge from the group with her maid, laden with baskets and small
parcels, and embarking under the conduct of the man in the red shirt,
whom she greeted affectionately as Hamish, assume her place in the
stern, and the ropes of the rudder, with evident use and wont. To watch
her steer out into the darkening loch, into the dimness and cold, gave
the young man a vague sensation of pain. It seemed to him as if the last
possible link with the human and sympathetic was detaching itself from
him. He did not know her indeed, but it does not take a long time or
much personal knowledge to weave this mystic thread between one young
creature and another. Most likely, he thought, she had not so much as
noticed him: but she had come into the half-real dream of his existence,
and touched his hand, as it were, in the vague atmosphere which
separates one being from another. Now he was left with nothing around
him but the darkening landscape and the noisy little crowd about the
coach; no one who could give him any fellowship or encouragement in the
further contact which lay before him with the mysterious and unknown.

After a few moments the landlady came towards him, smoothing down her
white apron, which made a great point in the landscape, so broad was it
and so white. She smiled upon him with ingratiating looks.

"Will you be going north, sir?" she said; "or will you be biding for the
night? Before we dish up the dinner and put the sheets on the bed we
like to know."

"Who is that young lady that has just gone away?" said Walter, not
paying much attention; "and where is she going? It is late and cold for
the water. Do you ever get frozen here?"

"That is Miss Oona of the Isle," said the landlady; "but as I was
saying, sir, about the beds----"

"Are the islands inhabited then?" said Walter; "and where is Kinloch
Houran? Does one go there by water too?"

"No, Mistress Macgregor," said Symington's voice on the other side; "my
lord will not bide here to-night. I've been down to the beach, and there
is a boat there, but not your lordship's own, any more than there was a
carriage waiting at Baldally. We must just put our pride in our pockets,
my lord, and put up with what we can get. When your lordship's ready
we're all ready."

By this time Big John and all the others were standing in a group
staring at Lord Erradeen with all their eyes. John explained himself in
a loud voice, but with an evident secret sense of shame.

"Hoo was I to ken? A lord has nae business to scour the country like
that, like ony gangrel body--sitting on the seat just like the rest of
us--Mr. Smith and him and me. Lord! hoo was I to ken? If you hear nae
good of yourself, it is just your ain blame. I was thinking of no lord
or any such cattle. I was just thinking upon my beasts. As for a lord
that gangs about like yon, deceiving honest folk, I wouldna give that
for him," John said, snapping his finger and thumb. His voice sank at
the end, and the conclusion of the speech was but half audible. Mrs.
Macgregor interposing her round, soft intonation between the speaker and
the stranger.

"Eh, my lord, I just beg your pardon! I had no notion--and I hope your
lordship found them a' civil. Big John is certainly a little quick with
his tongue--"

"I hope you're not supposing, Mistress Macgregor, that his lordship
would fash himself about Big John," said Symington, who had now taken
the direction of affairs. Walter, to tell the truth, did not feel much
inclination to enter into the discussion. The gathering chill of the
night had got into his inner man. He went down towards the beach slowly
pondering, taking every step with a certain hesitation. It seemed to him
that he stood on the boundary between the even ground of reality and
some wild world of fiction which he did not comprehend, but had a
mingled terror and hatred of. Behind him everything was homely and poor
enough; the light streamed out of the open doors and uncovered windows,
the red roof had a subdued glow of cheerfulness in the brown air, the
sounds about were cheerful, full of human bustle and movement, and
mutual good offices. The men led the horses away with a certain
kindness; the landlady, with her white apron, stopped to say a friendly
word to Big John, and interchanged civilities with the other humble
passengers who were bringing her no custom, but merely passing her door
to the ferry-boat that waited to take them across the loch. Everywhere
there was a friendly interchange, a gleam of human warmth and mutual
consolation. But before him lay the dark water, with a dark shadow of
mingled towers and trees lying upon it at some distance. He understood
vaguely that this was Kinloch Houran, and the sight of it was not
inviting. He did not know what it might be that should meet him there,
but whatever it was it repelled and revolted him. He seemed to be about
to overpass some invisible boundary of truth and to venture into the
false, into regions in which folly and trickery reigned. There was in
Walter's mind all the sentiment of his century towards the supernatural.
He had an angry disbelief in his mind, not the tranquil contempt of the
indifferent. His annoyed and irritated scorn perhaps was nearer faith
than he supposed; but he was impatient of being called upon to give any
of his attention to those fables of the past which imposture only could
keep up in the present. He felt that he was going to be made the victim
of some trick or other. The country people evidently believed, indeed,
as was natural enough to their simplicity; but Walter felt too certain
that he would see the mechanism behind the most artful veil to believe
it possible that he himself could be taken in, even for a moment. And
he had no desire to find out the contemptible imposture. He felt the
whole business contemptible; the secluded spot, the falling night, the
uninhabited place, were all part of the jugglery. Should he voluntarily
make himself a party to it, and walk into the snare with his eyes open?
He felt sure, indeed, that he would remain with his eyes open all the
time, and was not in the least likely to submit to any black art that
might be exercised upon him. But he paused, and asked himself was it
consistent with the dignity of a reasonable creature, a full-grown man,
to allow himself to be drawn into any degrading contact with this
jugglery at all?

The boat lay on the beach with his baggage already in it, and Symington
standing respectful awaiting his master's pleasure. Symington, no doubt,
was the god out of the machinery who had the _fin mot_ of everything and
all the strings in his hand. What if he broke the spell peremptorily and
retired to the ruddy fireside of the inn and defied family tradition? He
asked himself again what would come of it? and replied to himself
scornfully that nothing could come of it. What law could force him to
observe an antiquated superstition? It was folly to threaten him with
impossible penalties. And even if a thing so absurd could happen as that
he should be punished in purse or property for acting like a man of
sense instead of a fool, what then? The mere possibility of the risk
made Walter more disposed to incur it. It was monstrous and
insufferable that he should be made to carry out a tyrannical,
antiquated stipulation by any penalty of the law. It would be better to
fight it out once for all. All the sense of the kingdom would be with
him, and he did not believe that any judge could pronounce against him.
Here Symington called, with a slight tone of anxiety, "We are all ready,
my lord, and waiting." This almost decided Walter. He turned from the
beach, and made a few hasty steps up the slope.

But then he paused again, and turning round faced once more the
darkening water, the boat lying like a shadow upon the beach, the vague
figures of the men about it. The ferry-boat had pushed off and was
lumbering over the water with great oars going like bats' wings, and a
noisy human load. The other little vessel with that girl had almost
disappeared. He thought he could see in the darkness a white speck like
a bird, which was the white shawl that wrapped her throat and shoulders.
Her home lay somewhere in the centre of these dark waters, a curious
nest for such a creature. And his? He turned again towards the dark,
half-seen towers and gables. Some of them were so irregular in outline
that they could be nothing but ruins. He began to think of the past,
mute, out of date, harmless to affect the life that had replaced it,
which had taken refuge there. And he remembered his own argument about
the courtesy that the living owed to the dead. Well! if it was so, if it
was as a politeness, a courtesy to the past, it might be unworthy a
gentleman to refuse it. And perhaps when all was said it was just a
little cowardly to turn one's back upon a possible danger, upon what at
least the vulgar thought a danger. This decided him. He turned once
more, and with a few rapid steps reached the boat. Next moment they were
afloat upon the dark loch. There had been no wind to speak of on shore,
but the boat was soon struggling against a strong running current, and a
breeze which was like ice. The boatmen showed dark against the gleaming
loch, the rude little vessel rolled, the wind blew. In front of them
rose the dark towers and woods all black without a sign of human
habitation. Walter felt his heart rise at last with the sense of
adventure. It was the strangest way of entering upon a fine
inheritance.




CHAPTER X.


Kinloch Houran Castle stands out of the very waters of Loch Houran, with
its ruined gables and towers clothed with ivy. From the water it looked
like nothing but a roofless and deserted ruin. One tower in the centre
stood up above the jagged lines of the walls, with something that looked
like a ruined balcony or terrace commanding the landscape. The outline
was indistinct, for the trees that had got footing in the ruined
chambers below grew high and wild, veiling the means by which it was
sustained at that altitude: but the little platform itself was very
visible, surrounding the solid block of the tower, which showed no
window or opening, but looked as if it might yet outlive centuries. As
the boat approached, Walter saw the rowers whisper, and give significant
looks at Symington, who sat respectfully on one of the cross seats, not
to put himself in the way of his master, who occupied the other alone.
Hoarse whispers breathed about the other end of the boat, and Symington
was progged in the shoulders with an occasional oar. "Will ye no' be
letting him see't?" the rowers said. Walter's faculties were eagerly
acute in the strangeness of everything around him; the sense that he was
going to an impossible house--to a ruin--on an impossible errand, seemed
to keep him on the alert in every particular of his being. He could see
through the dusk, he could hear through the whistle of the wind and the
lashing of the water upon the boat's side, which was like the roar of a
mimic storm; and he was not even insensible to the comic element in
Symington's face, who waved away the oar with which he was poked, and
replied with words and frowns and looks full of such superiority of
information, that a burst of sudden nervous laughter at the sight
relieved Walter's excitement. He felt that a thrill of disapproval at
this went through the boat, and the men in the bow shook their bonnets
as they rowed.

"It's nothing to laugh at, my lord," said old Symington, "though I'm not
one--and I make no question but your lordship is not one--to lose my
presence o' mind. Yon's the phenomenon that they wanted me to call your
lordship's attention to," he added, jerking his arm, but without turning
his head, in the direction of the tower.

"The light?" Walter said. He had been about to ask what the meaning of
it might be. It had not been visible at all when they started, but for
the last moment or two had been growing steadily. The daylight was
waning every minute, and no doubt (he thought) it was this that made the
light more evident. It shone from the balcony or high roof-terrace
which surrounded the old tower. It was difficult to distinguish what it
was, or identify any lamp or beacon as the origin of it. It seemed to
come from the terrace generally, a soft, extended light, with nothing
fiery in it, no appearance of any blaze or burning, but a motionless,
clear shining, which threw a strange glimmer upwards upon the solid mass
of the tower, and downwards upon the foliage, which was black and
glistening, and upon the surface of the water. "Yon's the phenomenon,"
said Symington, pointing with a jerk of his elbow. The light brought out
the whole mass of rugged masonry and trees from the rest of the
landscape, and softly defined it against the darker background.

"How is it done?" said the young man, simply. He perceived the moment
after that his tone was like that of the bagman on the coach, and
shivered at the thought. So soft and steady was the light that it had
not seemed to him extraordinary at all.

"What do you mean by a phenomenon?" he asked, hastily. He remembered
suddenly that the young lady on the coach had spoken of this light, and
taken it, so to speak, under her protection.

"If your lordship has ainy desire to inquire into my opinion," said old
Symington, "though I doubt that's little likely, I would say it was just
intended to work on the imagination. Now and then, indeed, it's useful
in the way of a sign--like a person waving to you to come and speak;
but to work on the imagination, that's what I would say."

Walter looked up at the light which threw a faint glimmer across the
dark water, showing the blackness of the roughened ripple, over which
they were making their way, and bringing into curious prominence the
dark mass of the building rising out of it. It was not like the moon, it
was more distinct than starlight, it was paler than a torch: nor was
there any apparent central point from which it came. There was no
electric light in those days, nor was Loch Houran a probable spot for
its introduction: but the clear colourless light was of that
description. It filled the visitor with a vague curiosity, but nothing
more.

"To work on--whose imagination? and with what object?" he said.

But as he asked the question the boat shot forward into the narrow part
of the loch, and rounded the corner of the ruin. Anything more hopeless
as a place to which living passengers, with the usual encumbrances of
luggage, were going, could not well be conceived; but after a few
minutes' rowing, the boat ran in to some rude steps on the other side of
the castle, where there were traces of a path leading up across the
rough grass to a partially visible door. All was so dark by this time
that it was with difficulty that Walter found the landing; when he had
got ashore, and his portmanteau had been put out on the bank, the men in
the boat pushed off with an energy and readiness which proved their
satisfaction in getting clear of the castle and its traditions. To find
himself left there, with an apparently ruined house behind him, his
property at his feet, his old servant by his side, night closing in
around, and the dark glistening water lapping up on the stones at his
feet, was about as forlorn a situation as could be imagined.

"Are we to pass the night here?" he said, in a voice which could not
help being somewhat querulous.

The sound of a door opening behind interrupted his words, and turning
round he saw an old man standing in the doorway, with a small lamp in
his hand. He held it up high over his head to see who the new-comers
were; and Walter, looking round, saw a bowed and aged figure--a pale old
face, which might have been made out of ivory, so bloodless was it, the
forehead polished and shining, some grey locks escaping at the side of a
black skull-cap, and eyes looking out keenly into the darkness.

"It is just his lordship, Macalister," said old Symington.

The young man, who was so strange to it all, stood with a sort of
helplessness between the two old men who were familiar with each other
and the place and all its customs.

"Come away, then, come away," cried the guardian of the house, with a
shrill voice that penetrated the stillness sharply. "What are ye biding
there for in the dark?"

"And who's to carry up my lord's portmanteau?" said Symington.

"His portmanteau!" cried the other, with a sort of eldritch laugh. "Has
he come to bide?"

This colloquy held over him exasperated Walter, and he seized the
portmanteau hastily, forgetting his dignity.

"Lend a hand, Symington, and let us have no more talk," he said.

There is a moment when the most forlorn sensations and the most dismal
circumstances become either ludicrous or irritating. The young man shook
off his sense of oppression and repugnance as he hastened up the slope
to the door, while the lantern, flashing fitfully about, showed now the
broken path, now the rough red masonry of the ruin, which was scarcely
less unlike a ruin on this side than on the other. The door gave
admittance into a narrow passage only, out of which a spiral staircase
ascended close to the entrance, the passage itself apparently leading
away into the darkness to a considerable distance. At the end of it
stood a woman with a lighted candle peering out at the stranger as the
man had done. He seemed to realise the stones which every one has read
of a belated traveller unwillingly received into some desolate inn,
which turns out to be the headquarters of a robber-band, and where the
intruder must be murdered ere the morning.

"This is your way, my lord," said the shrill old man, leading the way up
the spiral stair. The whole scene was like a picture. The woman holding
up her light at the end of the long passage, the old man with his lamp,
the dark corners full of silence and mystery, the cold wind blowing as
through an icy ravine. And the sensations of the young man, who had not
even had those experiences of adventure which most young men have in
these travelling days, whom poverty and idleness had kept at home in
tame domestic comfort, were very strange and novel. He seemed to himself
to be walking into a romance, not into any real place, but into some old
storybook, a mystery of Udolpho, an antiquated and conventional region
of gloom and artificial alarms.

"Come this way, my lord; come this way," said the old man; "the steps
are a bit worn, for they're auld, auld--as auld as the house. But we
hope you'll find everything as comfortable as the circumstances will
permit. We have had just twa three days to prepare, my mistress and me;
but we've done our best, as far," he added, "as the circumstances will
permit. This way, this way, my lord."

At the head of the stair everything was black as night. The old man's
lamp threw his own somewhat fantastic shadow upon the wall of a narrow
corridor as he held it up to guide the new-comer. Close to the top of
the staircase, however, there opened a door, through which a warm light
was showing, and Walter, to his surprise, found himself in a
comfortably-furnished room with a cheerful fire, and a table covered
for dinner, a welcome end to the discomfort and gloom of the arrival.
The room was low, but large, and there were candles on the mantelpiece
and table which made a sort of twinkling illumination in the midst of
the dark panelled walls and dark furniture. The room was lined with
books at one end. It was furnished with comfortable sofas and chairs of
modern manufacture. There was a curious dim mirror over the mantelshelf
in a heavy gilt frame of old carving, one or two dim old portraits hung
opposite, the curtains were drawn, the fire was bright, the white
tablecloth with an old-fashioned silver vase in the middle, and the
candles burning, made a cheerful centre of light. At the further end was
another door, open, which admitted to a bed-room, dim, but comfortable
in the firelight. All this was encouraging. Walter threw himself into a
chair with a sense that the situation altogether was improving. Things
cannot be so very bad when there is a fire and lights, and a prospect of
dinner. He began to laugh at himself, when he had taken off his coat,
and felt the warmth of the glowing fire. Everything around him was
adapted for comfort. There was a little want of light which left all the
corners mysterious, and showed the portraits dimly, like half-seen
spectators, looking down from the wall; but the comfortable was much
more present than the weird and uncanny which had so much predominated
on his arrival. And when a dinner, which was very good and carefully
cooked, and a bottle of wine, which, though he had not very much skill
in that subject, Walter knew to be costly and fine, had been served with
noiseless care by Symington, the young man began to recover his spirits,
and to think of the tradition which required his presence here, as silly
indeed, but without harm. After dinner he seated himself by the fire to
think over the whole matter. It was not yet a fortnight since this
momentous change had happened in his life. Before that he had been
without importance, without use in the world, with little hope, with
nothing he cared for sufficiently to induce him to exert himself one way
or another. Now after he had passed this curious probation, whatever it
was, what a life opened before him! He did not even know how important
it was, how much worth living. It shone before him indistinctly as a
sort of vague, general realisation of all dreams. Wealth--that was the
least of it; power to do whatever he pleased; to affect other people's
lives, to choose for himself almost whatever pleased him. He thought of
Parliament, even of government, in his ignorance: he thought of travel,
he thought of great houses full of gaiety and life. It was not as yet
sufficiently realised to make him decide on one thing or another. He
preferred it as it was, vague--an indefinite mass of good things and
glories to come. Only this ordeal, or whatever it was--those few days
more or less that he was bound to remain at Kinloch Houran, stood
between him and his magnificent career. And after all, Kinloch Houran
was nothing very terrible. It might be like the mysteries of Udolpho
outside; but all the mysteries of Udolpho turned out, he remembered,
quite explainable, and not so very alarming after all; and these rooms,
which bore the traces of having been lived in very lately, and which
were quite adapted to be lived in, did not seem to afford much scope for
the mysterious. There were certain points, indeed, in which they were
defective, a want of air, something which occasionally caught at his
respiration, and gave him a sort of choked and stifled sensation; but
that was natural enough, so carefully closed as everything was, curtains
drawn, every draught warded off. Sometimes he had an uneasy feeling as
if somebody had come in behind him and was hanging about the back of his
chair. On one occasion he even went so far as to ask sharply, "Is it
you, Symington?" but, looking back, was ashamed of himself, for of
course there was nobody there. He changed his seat, however, so as to
face the door, and even went the length of opening it, and looking out
to see if there was any one about. The little corridor seemed to ramble
away into a darkness so great that the light of his candle did no more
than touch its surface--the spiral staircase looked like a well of
gloom. This made him shiver slightly, and a half-wish to lock his door
came over him, of which he felt ashamed as he turned back into the
cheerful light.

After all, it was nothing but the sensation of loneliness which made
this impression. He went back to his chair and once more resumed his
thoughts--or rather was it not his thoughts--nay, his fancies--that
resumed him, and fluttered about and around, presenting to him a hundred
swiftly changing scenes? He saw visions of his old life, detached scenes
which came suddenly up through the darkness and presented themselves
before him--a bit of Sloebury High Street, with a group of his former
acquaintances now so entirely separated from him; the little
drawing-room at the cottage, with Julia Herbert singing him a song;
Underwood's rooms on that particular night when he had gone in, in
search of something like excitement, and had found everything so dull
and flat. None of these scenes had any connection with his new beginning
in life. They all belonged to the past, which was so entirely past and
over. But these were the scenes which came with a sort of perversity,
all broken, changing like badly managed views in a magic lantern,
produced before him without any will of his. There was a sort of
bewildering effect in the way in which they swept along, one effacing
another, all of them so alien to the scene in which he found himself. He
had to get up at last, shaking himself as free of the curious whirl of
unwonted imagination as he could. No doubt his imagination was excited;
but happily not, he said to himself, by anything connected with the
present scene in which he found himself. Had it been roused by these
strange surroundings, by the darkness and silence that were about him,
by the loneliness to which he was so unused, he felt that there was no
telling what he might see or think he saw; but fortunately it was not
in this way that his imagination worked. His pulse was quick, however,
his heart beating, a quite involuntary excitement in all his bodily
faculties. He got up hastily and went to the bookshelves, where he
found, to his surprise, a large collection of novels and light
literature. It seemed to Walter that his predecessor, whom he had never
seen--the former Lord Erradeen, who inhabited these rooms not very long
ago--had been probably, like himself, anxious to quench the rising of
his fancy in the less exciting course of a fictitious drama, the
conventional excitements of a story. He looked over the shelves with a
curious sympathy for this unknown person, whom indeed he had never
thought much upon before. Did that unknown know who was to succeed him?
Did he ever speculate upon Walter as Walter was now doing upon him? He
turned over the books with a strange sense of examining the secrets of
his predecessor's mind. They were almost all books of adventure and
excitement. He took down, after a moment, a volume of Dumas, and
returned to his easy-chair by the fire, to lose himself in the
breathless ride of d'Artagnan and the luckless fortunes of the three
companions. It answered the purpose admirably. A sudden lull came over
his restless fancy. He was in great comfort externally, warmed and fed
and reposing after a somewhat weary day, and the spell of the great
story-teller got hold of him. He was startled out of this equable calm
when Symington came in to light the candles in his bed-room and bring
hot water, and offer his services generally. Symington regarded him with
an approval which he did not think it worth his while to dissemble.

"That's right, my lord, that's right," he said. "Reading's a very fine
thing when you have too much to occupy your thoughts."

Walter was amused by this deliverance, and happily not impatient of it.
"That is a new reason for reading," he said.

"But it is a real just one, if your lordship will permit me to say so.
Keep you to your book, my lord; it's just fine for putting other things
out of your head. It's Dumas's you're reading? I've tried that French
fellow myself, but I cannot say that I made head or tail of him. He
would have it that all that has happened in history was just at the
mercy of a wheen adventurers, two or three vagrants of Frenchmen. No,
no. I may believe a great deal, but I'm not likely to believe that."

"I see you are a critic, Symington; and do you read for the same reason
that you have been suggesting to me?--because you have too much to
occupy your thoughts?"

"Well, pairtly, my lord, and pairtly just in my idle hours to pass the
time. I have made up your fire and lighted the candles, and everything
is in order. Will I wait upon your lordship till you're inclined for
your bed? or will I----" Symington made a significant pause, which it
was not very difficult to interpret.

"You need not wait," Walter said; and then, with an instinct which he
was half ashamed of, he asked hurriedly, "Whereabouts do you sleep?"

"That is just about the difficulty," said old Symington. "I'm rather out
of call if your lordship should want anything. The only way will just be
to come down the stairs, if your lordship will take the trouble, and
ring the big bell. It would waken a' the seven sleepers if it was rung
at their lug: and I'm not so ill to waken when there is noise enough.
But ye have everything to your hand, my lord. If you'll just give a
glance into the other room, I can let you see where everything is. There
is the spirit-lamp, not to say a small kettle by the fire, and
there's----"

"That will do," said Walter. "I shall not want anything more to-night."

The old servant went away with a glance round the room, in which Walter
thought there was some anxiety, and stopped again at the door to say
"Good night, my lord. It's not that I am keen for my bed--if your
lordship would like me to bide, or even to take a doze upon a chair----"

"Go to bed, old Sym.," said the young man with a laugh. The idea of
finding a protector in Symington was somewhat ludicrous. But these
interruptions disturbed him once more, and brought back his excitement:
he felt a sort of pang as he heard the old servant's heavy step going
down the winding stair, and echoing far away, as it seemed, into the
bowels of the earth. Then that extreme and blighting silence which is
like a sort of conscious death came upon the place. The thick curtains
shut out every sound of wind and water outside as they shut out every
glimpse of light. Walter heard his pulse in his ears, his heart thumping
like the hammer of a machine. The whole universe seemed concentrated in
that only living breathing thing, which was himself. He tried to resume
his book, but the spell of the story was broken. He could no longer
follow the fortunes of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis. Walter Methven thrust
himself in front of these personages, and, though he was not half so
amusing, claimed a superior importance by right of those pulses that
clanged in his head like drums beating. He said to himself that he was
very comfortable, that he had never expected to be so well off. But he
could not regain his composure or sense of well-being. It was a little
better when he went into his bed-room, the mere movement and passage
from one room to another being of use to him. The sense of oppression
and stagnation, however, soon became almost greater here than in the
sitting-room. One side of the room was entirely draped in close-drawn
curtains, so that it was impossible to make out even where the windows
were. He drew them aside with some trouble, for the draperies were very
heavy, but not to much advantage. At first it seemed to him that there
were no windows at all; then he caught sight of something like a recess
high in the wall; and climbing up, found the hasp of a rough shutter,
which covered a small square window built into a cave of the deep
masonry. That this should be the only means of lighting an almost
luxurious sleeping chamber, bewildered him more and more; but it would
not open, and let in no air, and the atmosphere felt more stifling than
ever in this revelation of the impossibility of renewing it. Finally, he
went to bed with a sort of rueful sense that there was the last citadel
and refuge of a stranger beset by imaginations in so weird and
mysterious a place. He did not expect to sleep, but he determined that
he would not, at least, be the sport of his own fancies.

It astonished Walter beyond measure to find himself waking in broad
daylight, with Symington moving softly about the room, and a long
window, the existence of which he had never suspected, facing him as he
looked up from his pillows, after a comfortable night's sleep. Mingled
shame and amusement made him burst into an uneasy laugh, as he realised
this exceedingly easy end of his tribulations.

"Mrs. Macalister," said Symington, "would like well to know when your
lordship is likely to be ready, to put down the trout at the right
moment: for it's an awful pity to spoil a Loch Houran trout."




CHAPTER XI.


To insist upon the difference between an impression made when we arrive,
tired and excited at night, in a strange place, and that which the same
scene produces in the early freshness and new life of the morning, would
be to deliver ourselves over to the reign of the truism. It would,
however, have been impossible to feel this with more force than Walter
felt it. His sensations of alarm and excitement struck him not only as
unjustifiable but ludicrous. He laughed once more when he came out of
his chamber into the warm and genial room, which had seemed to him so
mysterious and dark on the previous night. There were windows upon
either side of the fire-place, each in a deep recess like a small room,
so great was the thickness of the wall. They looked out upon the
mountains, upon the narrow end of the loch, all bubbling and sparkling
in the sunshine, and down upon the little grassy slope rough and uncared
for, yet green, which was the only practicable entrance to the castle.
The windows were not large, and the room still not very light, though
the sunshine which poured in at one side made a most picturesque effect
of light and shade. The portraits on the wall were better than they had
seemed, and had lost the inquisitive air of dissatisfied inspection
which Walter's imagination had given them. The book-shelves at the end
gave relief to the room, with their cheerful gilding and the subdued
tone of their bindings. Walter thought of the chamber in the _Pilgrim's
Progress_ turned towards the sunrising, the name of which was Peace. But
peace was not the thing most suggested at Kinloch Houran by any of the
accessories about, and a vision of the chilliness of the gray light in
the afternoon, and the force of the east wind when it came, crossed his
mind in true nineteenth century criticism of the more poetical view. But
in the mean time, the policy of enjoying the present was undeniable,
especially when that present took the form of a Loch Houran trout, fresh
from the water, and cooked as fish only are under such conditions. He
looked back upon the agitations of the evening, and the reluctant angry
sentiment with which he had come to this old house of his family, with
amused incredulity and shame. To think that he could be such an
impressionable fool! He dismissed it all lightly from his mind as he
hurried over his breakfast, with the intention of getting out at once
and exploring everything about. He had even newspapers upon his table
along with the fresh scones, the new-made butter, all the fresh
provisions of the meal. To be sure, it was Glasgow and not London from
which they came--but the world's history was no less instant in them,
flashing from all parts of the world into this home of the ancient
ages.

His first inspection was of the castle itself, which he undertook under
the auspices of old Symington and old Macalister, both eager to explain
and describe what it had been, as well as what it was. What it was did
not consist of very much. "My lord's rooms," those in which he had spent
the night, were the only habitable portion of the great pile. He was led
through the roofless hall, with its musicians' gallery still perched
high up and overshadowed with canopies of ashen boughs, vigorous though
leafless; the guard-room, the supposed kitchen with its large chimney,
the oblong space from east to west which was supposed to have been the
chapel. All was a little incoherent in the completeness of ruin. There
was little of the stimulation of family pride to be got out of those
desolate places. The destruction was too complete to leave room even for
the facile web of imagination. The Crusader, about whom there was a
legend a little too picturesque and romantic to be true, or the lady who
was only saved by his sudden appearance from unfaithfulness, were not
more easy to conjure up within the inclosure of those shapeless walls
than on any unremarkable spot where the story might have been told.
Walter grew a little weary as Symington and the old guardian of the
house argued as to which was this division of the castle, and which
that. He left them discussing the question, and climbed up by a rude
stair which had been half improvised from the ruined projections of the
masonry, to the crumbling battlements above. From thence he looked down
upon a scene which was older than the oldest ruin, yet ever fresh in
perennial youth: the loch stretched out like a great mirror under the
wintry blue of the sky and the dazzling blaze of the sunshine,
reflecting everything, every speck of cloud above and every feathery
twig and minute island below. There was no need to make believe, to
simulate unfelt enthusiasm, or endeavour to connect with unreal
associations this wonderful and glorious scene. Perhaps there was in his
mind something more in harmony with the radiance of nature than with the
broken fragments of a history which he had no skill to piece up into
life again. He stood gazing upon the scene in a rapture of silent
delight. The hills in their robes of velvet softness, ethereal
air-garments more lovely than any tissue ever woven in mortal loom, drew
aside on either hand in the blue space and dazzling atmosphere to open
out this liquid vale of light, with its dark specks of islets, its
feathery banks, all rustling with leafless trees. Every outline and
detail within its reach was turned into a line, a touch, more sweet by
the flattering glory of the still water in which everything was double.
The morning freshness and sheen were still unbroken. It was like a new
creation lying contemplating itself in the first ecstasy of
consciousness. Walter was gazing upon this wonderful scene when the
sharp voice of old Macalister made him start, and take a step aside
which almost had serious consequences: for he stepped back unwarily
upon the crumbling wall, and might have fallen but for the violent grip
of the old man, who clutched him like a shaky Hercules, with a grasp
which was vigorous yet trembling.

"Lord's sake take care," he cried. His face flushed, then paled again
with genuine emotion. "Do you think we have a store of young lads like
you, that you will risk your life like yon? and just in the place where
the lady fell. You have given me such a start I canna breathe," he
cried.

To tell the truth, looking back upon it, Walter himself did not like the
look of the precipice which he had escaped.

"Where the lady fell?" he asked with a little eagerness, as he came to
the battlement.

"Oh ay. I seldom bother my head about what's happened, so to speak, two
or three days since. It was just there she fell. She has been bedridden
ever since, from a' I hear, which just shows the folly of venturing
about an auld place without somebody that knows how to take care of ye.
What would have come of you yoursel', that is the maister of a', if auld
Sandy Macalister had not been there?"

"Thank you, Macalister, you shall find me grateful," said Walter; "but
who was this lady? two or three days ago, did you say?"

"Years--years; did I no say years? Oh ay, it may be longer, twenty or
thirty. I'm meaning just naething in a life like mine. She had some
silly story of being frightened with a gentleman that she thought she
saw. They are keen about making up a story--women folk. She was just the
sister to the man of business, ye'll have heard of her--a pretty bit
thing, if that was of any consequence; but, Lord's sake, what's that
atween you and me, and you ignorant of everything?" the old man said.
"Do you see the chimneys yonder, and the gable end with the crow steps,
as they call it, just pushing out among the trees? That's just your ain
shooting-box--they call it Auchnasheen. I'll tell you the meanings of
the names another time. Out beyond yonder, the big house away at the
point, it's a new place built for his diversion by one of your new men.
Yon island far away that's bare and green is the island of Rest, where
all the loch was once buried: and atween us and that there's another
isle with a gable end among the trees which is just the last place
that's left to an auld race to plant their feet upon. It's a bonnie
piece of water; you that's come from the south you'll never have seen
the like. I'll tell you all the stories of the divers places, and how
they're connected with the Me'vens that are chiefs of Loch Houran; for I
wouldna give a button for that new-fangled title of the Lords Erradeen."

"It has lasted however for some centuries," said Walter, with a sudden
sense of displeasure which he felt to be absurd enough.

"And what is that in a family?" said old Macalister, "I think nothing of
it. A hundred years or two that never counts one way nor another; it's
nae antiquity. If that nonsense were true about the Warlock lord, he
would be but twa hundred and fifty at the present speaking, or
thereabouts, and a' that have ever thought they saw him represent him as
a fine personable man. I have never had that pleasure myself," the old
man said with his shrill laugh. "Where are you going, my young
gentleman? Ye'll just go down like a stane and end in a rattle of dust
and mortar, if you'll no be guided by me."

"Let you his lordship alone, Sandy," cried the voice of Symington,
intermingled with pants and sobs as he climbed up to the parapet. "Ye
must not occupy my lord's time with your old craiks. You would perhaps
like, my lord, to visit Auchnasheen, where the keeper will be on the
outlook: or may be it would be better to organise your day's shooting
for to-morrow, when you have lookit a little about you: or ye would
perhaps like to take a look at the environs, or see the factor, who is
very anxious as soon as your lordship has a moment--"

"Oh! and there is the minister that can tell ye a' about the
antiquities, my lord: and traces out the auld outline of the castle
grandly, till ye seem to see it in all its glory--"

"Or--" Symington had begun, when Walter turned at bay. He faced the old
men with a half-laughing defiance. "I see plenty of boats about," he
said. "I am going out to explore the loch. I want no attendance, or any
help, but that you will be good enough to leave me to myself."

"We'll do that, my lord. I will just run and cry upon Duncan that is
waiting about--"

The end of all this zeal and activity was that when Walter found himself
at last free and on the shining bosom of the loch, he was in a boat too
heavy for his own sole management, sharing the care of it with Duncan,
who was of a taciturn disposition and answered only when spoken to. This
made the arrangement almost as satisfactory as if he had been alone, for
Duncan was quite willing to obey and yield a hearty service without
disturbing his young master with either questions or remarks. He was a
large young man, strong and well knit though somewhat heavy, with a
broad smiling face, red and freckled, with honest blue eyes under sandy
eyelashes, and a profusion of strong and curly reddish hair. He beamed
upon Lord Erradeen with a sort of friendly admiration and awe,
answering, "Ay, my lord," and "No, my lord," always with the same smile
of general benevolence and readiness to comply with every desire. When
they had got beyond hail of the castle, from which Symington and
Macalister watched them anxiously, Duncan mutely suggested the elevation
of a mast and setting of the sail which the vessel was furnished with,
to which Walter assented with eagerness: and soon they were skimming
along before a light wind as if they had wings. And now began perhaps
the most pleasurable expedition that Walter had ever made in his life.
Escaped from the ruinous old pile, within which he had feared he knew
not what, escaped too from the observation and inspection of the two old
men so much better acquainted with the history of his family than
himself, whom he felt to be something between keepers and
schoolmasters--fairly launched forth upon the world, with nothing to
consult but his own pleasure, Walter felt his spirits rise to any height
of adventure. There was not indeed any very wild adventure probable, but
he was not much used to anything of the kind, and the sense of freedom
and freshness in everything was intoxicating to the young man. The small
boat, the rag of a sail, the lively wind that drove them along, the
rushing ripple under their keel, all delighted him. He held the helm
with a sense of pleasure almost beyond anything he had ever known,
feeling all the exhilaration of a discoverer in a new country, and for
the first time the master of himself and his fate. Duncan said nothing,
but grinned from ear to ear, when the young master in his inattention
to, or to tell the truth ignorance of, the capabilities of the boat,
turned the helm sharply, bringing her up to the wind in such a way as to
threaten the most summary end for the voyage. He kept his eye upon the
rash steersman, and Walter was not aware of the risks he ran. He
directed his little vessel now here, now there, with absolute enjoyment,
running in close ashore to examine the village, turning about again in a
wild elation to visit an island, running the very nose of the boat into
the rocky banks or feathery bushwood. How it was that no harm came as
they thus darted from point to point Duncan never knew. He stood up
roused to watchfulness, with his eyes intent on the movements of his
master ready to remedy any indiscretion. It was in the nature of such
undeserved vigilance that the object of it was never aware of it, but to
be sure Duncan had his own life to think of too.

They had thus swept triumphantly down the loch, the wind favouring, and
apparently watching over the rash voyager as carefully, as and still
more disinterestedly than Duncan. The motion, the air, the restless
career, the novelty, and the freedom enchanted Walter. He felt like a
boy in his first escapade, with an intoxicating sense of independence
and scorn of danger which gave zest to the independence. At every new
zigzag he made, Duncan but grinned the more. He uttered the Gaelic name
of every point and isle, briefly, with guttural depth, out of his chest,
as they went careering along before the wind. The boat was like an
inquisitive visitor, too open for a spy, poking in to every corner. At
length they came to an island standing high out of the water, with a
rocky beach, upon which a boat lay carefully hauled up, and a feathery
crest of trees, fine clumps of fir, fringed and surrounded by a
luxuriant growth of lighter wood. In the midst of this fine network of
branches, such as we call bare, being leafless, but which in reality are
all astir with life restrained, brown purple buddings eager to start and
held in like hounds in a leash--rose the solid outline of a house, built
upon the ridge of rock, and appearing like a shadow in the midst of all
the anatomy of the trees.

"That will be joost the leddy's," cried Duncan; at which Walter's heart,
so light in his bosom, gave an additional leap of pleasure. He steered
it so close that Duncan's vigilance was doubly taxed, for the least
neglect would have sent the little vessel ashore. Walter examined the
little landing, the rocky path that led up the bank, winding among the
trees, and as much as could be made out of the house, with keen
interest. The man with the red shirt, who had been the young lady's
boatman on the previous day, appeared at the further point as they went
on. He was fishing from a rock that projected into the water, and
turning to gaze upon the unwary boat, with astonished eyes, shouted
something in Gaelic to Duncan, who nodded good-humouredly a great many
times, and replied with a laugh in the same tongue--

"Yon will joost be Hamish," said Duncan.

"What is he saying?" cried Walter.

"He will just be telling us to mind where we are going," said Duncan,
imperturbable.

"Tell him to mind his own business," cried Walter, with a laugh. "And
who is Hamish, and who is the leddy? Come, tell me all about it." His
interest in the voyage flagged a little at this point.

Duncan thus interrogated was more put to it than by the dangerous course
they had hitherto been running.

"It will joost be the leddy," he said; "and Hamish that's her man: and
they will joost be living up there like ither persons, and fearing God:
fery decent folk--oh, joost fery decent folk."

"I never doubted that. But who are they, and what are they? And do you
mean to say they _live_ there, on that rock, in winter, so far north?"

Walter looked up at the dazzling sky, and repented his insinuation: but
he was, alas, no better than an Englishman, when all was said, and he
could not help a slight shiver as he looked back. Hamish, who had made a
fine point of colour on his projecting rock, had gone from that point,
and was visible in his red shirt mounting the high crest of the island
with hurried appearances and disappearances as the broken nature of the
ground made necessary. He had gone, there seemed little doubt, to
intimate to the inhabitants the appearance of the stranger. This gave
Walter a new thrill of pleasure, but it took away his eagerness about
the scenery. He lay back languidly, neglecting the helm, and as he
distracted Duncan's attention too, they had nearly run aground on the
low beach of the next island. When this difficulty was got over, Walter
suddenly discovered that they had gone far enough, and might as well be
making their way homeward, which was more easily said than done; for the
wind, which had hitherto served their purpose nobly, was no longer their
friend. They made a tack or two, and crept along a little, but
afterwards resigned themselves to ship the sail and take to the oars,
which was not so exhilarating nor so well adapted to show the beauty of
the landscape. It took them some time to make their way once more past
the rocky point, and along the edge of the island which attracted
Walter's deepest interest, but to which he could not persuade Duncan to
give any name.

"It will joost be the leddy's," the boatman insisted on saying, with a
beaming face; but either his English or his knowledge was at fault, and
he went no further.

Walter's heart beat with a kind of happy anxiety, a keen but pleasant
suspense, as he swept his oar out of the water, and glanced behind him
to measure how near they were to the landing, at which he had a
presentiment something more interesting than Hamish might be seen. And
as it turned out, he had not deceived himself. But what he saw was not
what he expected to see.

The lady on the bank was not his fellow-traveller of yesterday. She was
what Walter to himself, with much disappointment, called an old lady,
wrapped in a large furred mantle and white fleecy wrap about her head
and shoulders. She stood and waved her hand as Walter's boat came slowly
within range.

"You will be joost the leddy," said Duncan of the few words; and with
one great sweep of his oar he turned the boat towards the landing. It
was the man's doing, not the master's; but the master was not sorry to
take advantage of this sudden guidance. It was all done in a moment,
without intention. Hamish stood ready to secure the boat, and before he
had time to think, Walter found himself on the little clearing above the
stony bit of beach, hat in hand, glowing with surprise and pleasure, and
receiving the warmest of welcomes.

"You will forgive me for just stopping you on your way," the lady said;
"but I was fain to see you, Lord Erradeen, for your father and I were
children together. I was Violet Montrose. You must have heard him speak
of me."

"I hope," said Walter, with his best bow, and most ingratiating tone,
"that you will not consider it any fault of mine; but I don't remember
my father; he died when I was a child."

"Dear me," cried the lady; "how could I be so foolish! Looking at you
again, I see you would not be old enough for that: and, now I remember,
he married late, and died soon after. Well, there is no harm done. We
are just country neighbours, and as I was great friends with Walter
Methven some five-and-forty years ago----"

"I hope," said the young man with a bow and smile, "that you will be so
good as to be friends with Walter Methven now: for that is the name
under which I know myself."

"Oh, Lord Erradeen," the lady said with a little flutter of pleasure.
Such a speech would be pretty from any young man; but made by a young
lord, in all the flush of his novel honours, and by far the greatest
potentate of the district, there was no one up the loch or down the loch
who would not have been gratified. "It is just possible," she said,
after a momentary pause, "that having been brought up in England, and
deprived of your father so early, you may not know much about your
neighbours, nor even who we are, in this bit island of ours. We are the
Forresters of Eaglescairn, whom no doubt ye have heard of; and I am one
of the last of the Montroses--alas! that I should say so. I have but one
of a large family left with me; and Oona and me, we have just taken
advantage of an old family relic that came from my side of the house,
and have taken up our habitation here. I hear she must have travelled
with you yesterday on the coach, not thinking who it was. Oh, yes; news
travels fast at this distance from the world. I think the wind blows it,
or the water carries it. All the loch by this time is aware of Lord
Erradeen's arrival. Indeed," she added, with a little laugh, "you know,
my lord, we all saw the light."

She was a woman over fifty, but fair and slight, with a willowy figure,
and a complexion of which many a younger woman might have been proud;
and there was a little airiness of gesture and tread about her, which
probably thirty years before had been the pretty affectations,
half-natural, half-artificial, of a beauty, and which still kept up the
tradition of fascinating powers. The little toss of her head, the
gesture of her hands, as she said the last words, the half-apologetic
laugh as if excusing herself for a semi-absurdity, were all
characteristic and amusing.

"You know," she added, "in the Highlands we are allowed to be
superstitious," and repeated the little laugh at herself with which she
deprecated offence.

"What is it supposed to mean?" Walter asked somewhat eagerly. "Of course
there is some natural explanation which will be simple enough. But I
prefer to take the old explanation, if I knew what it was."

"And so do we," she said quickly. "We are just ready to swear to it, man
and woman of us on the loch. Some say it is a sign the head of the house
is coming--some that it is a call to him to come and meet--Dear me,
there is Oona calling. And where is Hamish? I will not have the child
kept waiting," said the lady, looking round her with a little nervous
impatience.

She had begun to lead the way upward by a winding path among the rocks
and trees, and now paused, a little breathless, to look down towards the
landing-place, and clap her hands impatiently.

"Hamish is away, mem," said the woman whom Walter had seen on the coach,
and who now met them coming down the winding path. She looked at him
with a cordial smile, and air of kindly welcome. It was evident that it
did not occur to Mysie that her salutations might be inappropriate.
"You're very welcome, sir, to your ain country," she said with a
courtesy, which was polite rather than humble. Walter felt that she
would have offered him her hand, on the smallest encouragement, with a
kindly familiarity which conveyed no disrespect.

"You should say my lord, Mysie," her mistress remarked.

"Deed, mem, and so I should; but when you're no much in the way o't, ye
get confused. I said, as soon as I heard the news, that it would be the
young gentleman on the coach, and I had just a feeling a' the time that
it was nae tourist, but a kent face. Hamish is away, mem. I tell him he
hears Miss Oona's foot on the bank, before ever she cries upon him; and
yonder he is just touching the shore, and her ready to jump in."

The party had reached a little platform on the slope. The path was
skilfully engineered between two banks, clothed with ferns and grasses,
and still luxuriant with a vivid green, though the overhanging trees
were all bare. Here and there a little opening gave a point of repose
and extended view. Mrs. Forrester paused and turned round to point out
to her visitor the prospect that now lay before them. She was a little
breathless and glad of the pause, but it did not suit her character to
say so. She pointed round her with a little triumph. They were high
enough to see the loch on either side, looking down upon it through the
fringe of branches. Opposite to this was the mainland which at that spot
formed a little bay, thickly wooded with the dark green of the fir
woods, amid which appeared the gables of a sort of ornamental cottage.
Nearer the eye was the road, and underneath the road on the beach stood
a little slight figure in the closely-fitting garb which Walter
recognised. She had evidently been set down from a waggonette full of a
lively party which waited on the high road to see her embark. It was
impossible to hear what they were saying, but the air was full of a
pleasant murmur of voices.

"It is the young Campbells of Ellermore," said Mrs. Forrester, waving
her handkerchief towards the group. "Oona has been spending last night
with them, and they have brought her back. They will all be astonished,
Mysie, to see me standing here with a gentleman. Dear me, they will all
be saying who has Mrs. Forrester got with her?"

"They will think," said Mysie, "just that it's Mr. James or Mr. Ronald
come home."

"Ah, Mysie, if that could be!" said the lady of the isle: and she put
her hands together, which were thin and white, and ornamented by a
number of rings, with a pretty conventional gesture of maternal regret.
Walter stood looking on with mingled amazement and pleasure: pleased as
if he were at a play with all the new indications of domestic history
which were opening to him, and with a sense of enjoyment through all his
being. When the girl sprang into the boat, and Hamish, conspicuous in
his red shirt, pushed off into the loch, the tumult of good-byes became
almost articulate. He laughed to himself under his breath, remembering
all the greetings he had heard along the line of railway, the
recognitions at every station.

"Your daughter seems to know everybody," he said.

"And how could she help knowing every person," cried Mysie, taking the
words, as it were, out of her mistress's mouth, "when she was born and
brought up on the loch, and never one to turn her back upon a neebor,
gentle or simple, but just adored wherever she goes?"

"Oh, whisht, Mysie, whisht! we are partial," said Mrs. Forrester with
her little antiquated graces; and then she invited Lord Erradeen to
continue his walk.

It was the full blaze of day, and the view extended as they went higher
up to the crest of rock upon which the house was set. It was built of
irregular reddish stone, all cropped with lichens where it was visible,
but so covered with clinging plants that very little of the walls could
be seen. The rustic porch was built something like a bee-hive, with
young, slim-growing saplings for its pillars, and chairs placed within
its shelter. There were some flower-beds laid out around, in which a few
autumn crocuses had struggled into pale bloom--and a number of china
roses hung half opened against the sides of the house. The roofs were
partly blue slates, that most prosaic of comfortable coverings, and
partly the rough red tiles of the country, which shone warm through the
naked boughs.

    "Every hardy plant could bear
     Loch Katrine's keen and searching air,"

was garlanded about the house, the little lawn was as green as velvet,
the china roses were pale but sweet. Behind the house were the mossed
apple-trees of a primitive orchard among the rocky shelves. It lay
smiling in the sun, with the silver mirror of the lake all round, and
every tint and outline doubled in the water. From the door the dark old
castle of Kinloch Houran stood out against the silent darkness of the
hill. Little rocky islets, like a sport of nature, too small to be
inhabited by anything bigger than rabbits, lay all reflected in broken
lines of rock and brushwood, between Walter's old castle and this
romantic house. They were so visible, one to the other, that the mere
position seemed to form a link of connection between the inhabitants.

"We cannot but take an interest in you, you see, Lord Erradeen, for we
can never get out of sight of you," said Mrs. Forrester.

"And I think the old place looks better from here than any other view I
have seen," Walter added almost in the same breath.

They laughed as they spoke together. It was not possible to be more
entirely "country neighbours." The young man had a fantastic feeling
that it was a sort of flattery to himself that his house should be so
entirely the centre of the landscape. He followed the lady into the
house with a little reluctance, the scene was so enchanting. Inside, the
roofs were low, but the rooms well-sized and comfortable. They were full
of curiosities of every kind: weapons from distant countries, trophies
of what is called "the chase," hung upon the wall of the outer hall.
The drawing-room was full of articles from India and China, carved
ivories, monsters in porcelain, all the wonders that people used to send
home before we got Japanese shops at every corner. An air of gentle
refinement was everywhere, with something, too, in the many ornaments,
little luxuries, and daintinesses which suggested the little
_minauderies_ of the old beauty, the old-fashioned airs and graces that
had been irresistible to a previous generation.

"You will just stay and eat your luncheon with us, Lord Erradeen. I
might have been but poor company, an old woman as I'm getting; but, now
that Oona is coming, I need not be too modest; for, though there will
not be a grand luncheon, there will be company, which is always
something. And sit down and tell me something about your father and the
lady he married, and where you have been living all this time."

Walter laughed. "Is it all my humble history you want me to tell you?"
he said. "It is not very much. I don't remember my father, and the lady
he married is--my mother, you know. The best mother----But I have not
been the best of sons. I was an idle fellow, good-for-nothing a little
while ago. Nobody knew what was going to come of me. I did nothing but
loaf, if you know what that means."

"Ah, that I do," said Mrs. Forrester; "that was just like my Jamie. But
now they tell me he is the finest officer----"

Walter paused, but the lady was once more entirely attention, listening
with her hands clasped, and her head raised to his with an ingratiating
sidelong look. He laughed. "They all made up their minds I was to be
good-for-nothing----"

"Yes," murmured Mrs. Forrester, softly, half closing her eyes and
shaking her head, "that was just like my Bob--till he took a thought:
and now he is planting coffee in Ceylon and doing well. Yes? and then?"

"An old man arrived one evening," said Walter, half laughing, "and told
me--that I was Lord Erradeen. And do you know, from that moment nobody,
not even I myself, would believe that I had ever loafed or idled or been
good-for-nothing."

There was a pause, in which Walter thought he heard some one move behind
him. But no sound reached Mrs. Forrester, who responded eagerly--

"My son, the present Eaglescairn, was just of the same kind," she said,
reflectively. She had a comparison ready for every case that could be
suggested--"till he came of age. It was in the will that they were to
come of age only at twenty-five, and till then I had a sore time. Oh,
Oona, my dear, is that you? And had you a pleasant evening. Here is
young Lord Erradeen that has come in, most kindly, I'm sure, to tell me
about his father, that I knew so well. And it appears you met upon the
coach yesterday. Come away, my dear, come away! And that was just most
curious that, knowing nothing of one another, you should meet upon the
coach."

Oona came in lightly, in her out-door dress. She gave Walter a look
which was very friendly. She had paused for a moment at the door, and
she had heard his confession. It seemed to Oona that what he said was
generous and manly. She was used to forming quick impressions. She had
been annoyed when she had heard from Hamish of the visitor, but her mind
changed when she heard what he said. She came up to him and held out her
hand. The fresh air was in her face, which Walter thought was like the
morning, all bright and fresh and full of life. She made him a little
curtsey with much gravity, and said in the pretty voice which was so
fresh and sweet, and with that novelty of accent which had amused and
delighted the young man, "You are welcome to your own country Lord
Erradeen."

"Now that is very pretty of you, Oona," cried her mother. "I never
thought you would remember to pay your little compliment, as a well-bred
person should; for, to tell the truth, she is just too brusque--it is
her fault."

"Hamish told me what to say," said Oona, with a glance of provocation.
"He is a very well-bred person. He told me I was to bid my lord welcome
to his own."

"Oh, my dear, you need not take away the merit of it, as if you had not
thought of it yourself," said the mother, aggrieved; "but run away and
take off your hat, and let us have our lunch, for Lord Erradeen has been
all the morning on the water and he will be hungry, and you are all
blown about with the wind."

The young people exchanged looks, while Mrs. Forrester made her little
protest. There was a sort of laughing interchange between them, in which
she was mocking and he apologetic. Why, neither could have said. They
understood each other, though they by no means clearly understood each
what he and she meant. There was to be a little war between them, all in
good-humour and good-fellowship, not insipid agreement and politeness.
The next hour was, Walter thought, the most pleasant he had ever spent
in his life. He had not been ignorant of such enjoyments before. When we
said that various mothers in Sloebury had with the first news of his
elevation suffered a sudden pang of self-reproach, to think how they had
put a stop to certain passages, the end of which might now have been to
raise a daughter to the peerage, it must have been understood that
Walter was not altogether a novice in the society of women; but this had
a new flavour which was delightful to him. It had been pleasant enough
in the cottage, when Julia Herbert sang, and on other occasions not
necessary to enter into. But on this romantic isle, where the sound of
the loch upon the rocks made a soft accompaniment to everything, in a
retirement which no vulgar interruption could reach, with the faded
beauty on one side, scarcely able to forget the old pretty mannerisms
of conquest even in her real maternal kindness and frank Highland
hospitality, and the girl, with her laughing defiance on the other, he
felt himself to have entered a new chapter of history. The whole new
world into which he had come became visible to him in their
conversation. He heard how he himself had been looked for, and how "the
whole loch" had known something about him for years before he had ever
heard of Loch Houran. "We used to know you as the 'English lad,'" Oona
said, with her glance of mischief. All this amused Walter more than
words can say. The sun was dropping towards the west before--escorted to
the landing-place by both the ladies, and taken leave of as an old
friend--he joined the slow-spoken Duncan, and addressed himself to the
homeward voyage. Duncan had not been slow of speech in the congenial
company of Hamish. They had discussed the new-comer at length, with many
a shaft of humour and criticism, during the visit which Duncan had paid
to the kitchen. He blushed not now, secure in the stronghold of his
unknown tongue, to break off in a witty remark at Walter's expense as he
turned to his master his beaming smile of devotion. They set off
together, master and man, happy yet regretful, upon their homeward way.
And it was a tough row back to Kinloch Houran against the fresh and not
too quiet Highland wind.




CHAPTER XII.


The castle looked more grim and ruined than ever as Walter set foot once
more upon the rough grass of the mound behind. He dismissed the smiling
Duncan with regret. As he went up to the door, which now stood open, he
thought to himself with relief that another day would finish his
probation here, and that already it was more than half over; but next
moment remembered that the end of his stay at Kinloch Houran would mean
also an end of intercourse with his new friends, which gave a different
aspect to the matter altogether. At the door of the castle old
Macalister was waiting with a look of anxiety.

"Ye'll have had no luncheon," he said, "and here's Mr. Shaw the factor
waiting to see ye."

Macalister had not the manners of Symington, and Walter already felt
that it was a curious eccentricity on the part of the old man to leave
out his title. The factor was seated waiting in the room up-stairs; he
was a middle-aged man, with grizzled, reddish locks, the prototype in a
higher class of Duncan in the boat. He got up with a cordial
friendliness which Walter began to feel characteristic, but which was
also perhaps less respectful than might have been supposed appropriate,
to meet him. He had a great deal to say of business which to Walter was
still scarcely intelligible. There were leases to renew, and there was
some question about a number of crofter families, which seemed to have
been debated with the former lord, and to have formed the subject of
much discussion.

"There is that question about the crofters at the Truach-Glas," Mr. Shaw
said.

"What crofters? or rather what are crofters? and what is the question
and where is the Truach-Glas?" Lord Erradeen said.

He pronounced it, alas! Truack, as he still called loch, lock--which
made the sensitive natives shudder. Mr. Shaw looked at him with a little
disapproval. He felt that the English lad should have been more
impressed by his new inheritance, and more anxious to acquire a mastery
of all the facts connected with it. If, instead of wandering about the
loch all the morning, he had been looking up the details of the business
and the boundaries of the estate, and studying the map! But that not
being the case, of course there was nothing to be done but to explain.

"I had thought that Mr. Milnathort would have put the needs of the
estate more clearly before you. There are several questions to be
settled. I don't know what may be your views as to a landlord's duties,
Lord Erradeen----"

"I have no views," said Walter; "I am quite impartial. You must
recollect that I have only been a landlord for a fortnight."

"But I suppose," said the factor somewhat severely, "that the heir to
such a fine property has had some kind of a little training?"

"I have had no training--not the slightest. I had no information even
that I was the heir to any property. You must consider me as entirely
ignorant, but ready to learn."

Shaw looked at him with some surprise, but severely still. "It is very
curious," he said, as if that too had been Walter's fault, "that you did
not know you were the heir. We knew very well here; but the late lord
was like most people, not very keen about his successor; and then he was
a comparatively young man when he died."

"I know nothing of my predecessor," said Walter. "What was the cause of
his death? I should like to hear something about him. Several of them
must have died young, I suppose, or I, so far off, could never have
become the heir."

The factor looked at him keenly, but with doubtful eyes. "There are
secrets in all families, my Lord Erradeen," he said.

"Are there? I thought that was rather an old-fashioned sentiment. I
don't think, except that I was not always virtuously occupied, that
there was any secret in mine."

"And I am sure there is no secret in mine," said Mr. Shaw,
energetically; "but then you see I am not, and you were not till a very
recent date, Lord Erradeen. There is a kind of something in the race
that I will not characterise. It is a kind of a melancholy turn; the
vulgar rumours ye will have heard, to which I attach no credence. It is
little worth while living in the nineteenth century," the factor said
with emphasis, "if ye are to be subject to delusions like that."

"I tell you I am quite ignorant; and, except by hints which I could not
understand, Mr. Milnathort did not give me any information. Speak
plainly, I want to know what the mystery is; why am I here in this
tumble-down old place?" Walter cried with an accent of impatience.

Shaw kept a watchful eye upon him, with the air of a man whom another is
trying to deceive.

"It is something in the blood, I'm thinking," the factor said. "They all
seem to find out there's a kind of contrariety in life, which is a thing
we all must do to be sure, but generally without any fatal effects.
After a certain age they all seem to give way to it. I hope that _you_,
my lord, being out of the direct line, will escape: the populace--if ye
can accept their nonsense--say it's a--well, something supernatural--a
kind of an influence from him they call the Warlock Lord." Shaw laughed,
but somewhat uneasily, apologetically. "I think shame to dwell upon such
absurdity," he said.

"It does sound very absurd."

"That is just it--nonsense! not worth the consideration of sensible men.
And I may say to you, that are, I hope, of a more wholesome mind, that
they are terribly given up to caprice in this family. The Truach-Glas
crofters have been up and down twenty times. The late lord made up his
mind he would let them stay, and then that they must go, and again that
he would just leave them their bits of places, and then that he would
help them to emigrate; and after all, I had the order that they were to
be turned out, bag and baggage. I could not find it in my heart to do
it. I just put off, and put off, and here he is dead; and another," said
Shaw, with a suppressed tone of satisfaction, "come to the throne. And
you're a new man and a young man, and belong to your own century, not to
the middle ages," the factor cried with a little vehemence. Then he
stopped himself, with a "I beg your pardon, my lord; I am perhaps saying
more than I ought to say."

Walter made no reply. He was not sure that he did not think the factor
was going too far, for though he knew so little of his family, he
already felt that it was something not to be subjected to discussion by
common men. These animadversions touched his pride a little; but he was
silent, too proud to make any remark. He said, after a pause--

"I don't know that I can give my opinion without a further acquaintance
with the facts. If I were to do so on so slight a knowledge, I fear you
might think that a caprice too."

The factor looked at him with a still closer scrutiny, and took the
hint. There is nothing upon which it is so necessary to understand the
permitted limit of observation as in the discussion of family
peculiarities. Though he was so little responsible for this, and even so
little acquainted with them, it was impossible that Lord Erradeen should
not associate himself with his race. Mr. Shaw got out his papers, and
entered upon the questions in which the opinion of the new proprietor
was important, without a word further about the late lord and the family
characteristics. He explained to Walter at length the position of the
crofters, with their small holdings, who in bad seasons got into arrears
with their rents, and sometimes became a burden upon the landlord, in
whom, so far north, there was some admixture of a Highland chief. The
scheme of the estate altogether was of a mixed kind. There were some
large sheep farms and extensive moors still intermingled with glens more
populated than is usual in these regions. Some of them were on lands but
recently acquired, and the crofters in particular were a burden
transmitted by purchase, which the father of the last lord had made. It
was believed that there had been some covenant in the sale by which the
rights of the poor people were secured, but this had fallen into
forgetfulness, and there was no reason in law why Lord Erradeen should
not exercise all the rights of a proprietor and clear the glen, as so
many glens had been cleared. This was the first question that the new
lord would have to decide. The humble tenants were all under notice to
leave, and indeed were subject to eviction as soon as their landlord
pleased. It was with a kind of horror that Walter listened to this
account of his new possibilities.

"Eviction!" he said; "do you mean the sort of thing that happens in
Ireland?" He held his breath in unfeigned dismay and repugnance. "I
thought there was nothing of the sort here."

"Ireland is one thing, and Scotland another," said the factor. "We are a
law-abiding people. No man will ever be shot down behind a hedge by a
Highlander: so if you should resolve to turn them out to-morrow, my
lord, ye need stand in no personal fear."

Walter put aside this somewhat contemptuous assurance with a wave of his
hand.

"I have been told of a great many things I could do," he said, "in this
last fortnight; but I never knew before that I could turn out a whole
village full of people if I chose, and make their houses desolate."

It was a new view altogether of his new powers. He could not help
returning in thought to all the prepossessions of his former
middle-class existence, where arbitrary power was unknown, and where a
mild, general beneficence towards "the poor" was the rule. He said, half
to himself, "What would my mother say?" and in the novelty of the idea,
half laughed. What a thrill it would send through the district
visitors, the managers of the soup kitchen, all the charitable people!
There suddenly came up before him a recollection of many a conversation
he had heard, and taken no note of--of consultations how to pay the rent
of a poor family here and there, how to stop a cruel landlord's mouth.
And that he should appear in the character of a cruel landlord! No doubt
it would have been easy to show that the circumstances were quite
different. But in the mean time the son of Mrs. Methven could not throw
off the traditions in which he had been brought up. He contemplated the
whole matter from a point of view altogether different even from that of
Mr. Shaw, the factor. Shaw was prepared to prove that on the whole the
poor crofters were not such bad tenants, and that sheep farms and deer
forests, though more easily dealt with, had some disadvantages too; for
there was Paterson of Inverchory that had been nearly ruined by a bad
lambing season, and had lost the half of his flock; and as for the
shootings, was there not the dreadful example before them of the moors
at Finlarig, where everything had been shot down, and the game fairly
exterminated by a set of fellows that either did not know what they were
doing, or else were making money of it, and not pleasure. The very veins
in Shaw's forehead swelled when he spoke of this.

"I would like to have had the ducking of him," he cried; "a man with a
grand name and the soul of a henwife, that swept out the place as if he
had done it with a broom, and all for the London market; grant me
patience! You will say," added Shaw, "that the thing to do at Inverchory
is to get a man with more capital now that John Paterson's tack is done;
and that there's few sportsmen like Sir John. That's all very true; but
it just shows there are risks to be run in all ways, and the poor folk
at Truach-Glas would never lead you into losses like that."

Walter, however, did not pay much attention even to this view. His mind
had not room at the moment for Paterson of Inverchory, who was behind
with the rent, or Sir John, who had devastated the moors. He did not get
beyond the primitive natural horror of what seemed to him an outrage of
all natural laws and kindness. He had not been a landowner long enough
to feel the sacred right of property. He turn the cottagers out of their
poor little homes for the sake of a few pounds more or less of which he
stood in no need? The very arguments against taking this step made him
angry. Could anybody suppose he could do it? he, Walter Methven! As for
the Erradeen business, and all this new affair altogether--good heavens,
if anybody thought he would purchase it by that! In short, the young
man, who was not born a grand seigneur, boiled up in righteous wrath,
and felt it high scorn and shame that it could be supposed of him that
he was capable, being rich, of oppressing the poor--which was the way
in which he put it, in his limited middle-class conditions of thought.

Mr. Shaw was half-gratified, half-annoyed by the interview. He said to
the minister with whom he stopped to dine, and who was naturally much
interested about the new young man, that assuredly the young fellow had
a great deal of good in him, but he was a trifle narrow in his way of
looking at a question, "which is probably just his English breeding,"
the factor said. "I would have put the Crofter question before him in
all its bearings; but he was just out of himself at the idea of
eviction--like what happened in Ireland, he said. I could not get him to
go into the philosophy of it. He just would not hear a word. Nothing of
the kind had ever come his way before, one could see, and he was just
horrified at the thought."

"I don't call that leemited, I call it Christian," the minister said,
"and I am not surprised he should have a horror of it. I will go and see
him in the morning, if you think it will be well taken, for I'm with him
in that, heart and soul."

"Yes, yes, that's all in your way," said Mr. Shaw; "but I am surprised
at it in a young man. There is a kind of innocence about it. But I would
not wonder after a little if he should change his mind, as others have
done."

"Do you form any theory in your own thoughts, Shaw," said the minister,
"as to what it is that makes them so apt to change?"

"Not I," cried the factor, with a shrug of his shoulders; and then he
added hurriedly, "you've given me a capital dinner, and that whisky is
just excellent: but I think I must be going my ways, for already it's
later than I thought."

Mr. Cameron, who was minister of the parish, was, like Walter, a
stranger to the district and its ways. He was a great antiquary and full
of curiosity about all the relics of the past, and he had an enlightened
interest in its superstitions too. But Shaw was a Loch Houran man. He
had a reverence for the traditions which of course he vowed he did not
believe, and though he was very ready to make this statement in his own
person he did not like to hear outsiders, as he called the rest of the
world, discussing them disrespectfully? So he desired his dog-cart to be
"brought round," and drove home in the clear, cold night, warm at his
heart, good man, because of the good news for the Crofters, but a little
dissatisfied in his mind that the new lord should be doing this simply
as a matter of sentiment, and not from a reasonable view of the
situation. "Provided even that he keeps of that mind," the factor said
to himself.

Walter subsided out of his just indignation when the business part of
the interview ended, and he came out to the open air to see Mr. Shaw
away.

"This must all be put in order," he said, as he accompanied his visitor
to the boat.

Shaw looked at him with a little curiosity mingled with a slight air of
alarm.

"Auchnasheen being so near," he said, "which is a very comfortable
place, there has never been much notice taken of the old castle."

"But I mean to take a great deal of notice of it," the young man said
with a laugh. "I shall have some of the antiquaries down and clear out
all the old places."

His laugh seemed to himself to rouse the echoes, but it called forth no
responsive sound from his companion, and he caught a glimpse of old
Macalister in the distance shaking his old head. This amused yet
slightly irritated Walter, in the sense of power which alternated with a
sense of novelty and unreality in his mind.

"So you object to that?" he said to the old man. "You don't like your
privileges invaded?"

"It's no that," said Macalister; "but ye'll never do it. I've a lang,
lang acquaintance with the place, and I've witnessed many a revolution,
if I may say sae. One was to pull down the auld wa's altogether; another
was to clean it a' out like you. But it's never been done. And it'll
never be done. I'm just as sure o' that as your young lordship is that
you have a' the power in your hands."

Walter turned away with a little disdain in his laugh. It was not worth
while arguing out the matter with Macalister. Who should prevent him
from doing what he liked with his old house? He could not but reflect
upon the curious contradictions with which he was beset. He was supposed
to be quite capable of turning out a whole village out of their homes,
and making them homeless and destitute; but he was not supposed capable
of clearing out the blocked-up passage and rooms of an old ruin! He
smiled with a kind of scornful indignation as he went up to his
sitting-room. By this time the afternoon had lost all light and colour.
It was not dark, but neither was it day. A greyness had come into the
atmosphere; the shadows were black, and had lost all transparency. The
two windows made two bars of a more distinct greyness in the room, with
a deep line of shade in the centre between, which was coloured, but
scarcely lighted up, by the fire. He could not but think with a sense of
relief that the three days which were all he believed that were
necessary for his stay at Kinloch Houran were half over at least.
Another night and then he would be free to go. He did not mean to go any
further than to Auchnasheen, which was exactly opposite to the island;
and then, with a smile creeping about the corners of his mouth, he said
to himself, that he could very well amuse himself for a few days, what
with the shooting and what with----

And it would be comfortable to get out of this place, where the air, he
could not tell why, seemed always insufficient. The wainscot, the dark
hangings, the heavy old walls, seemed to absorb the atmosphere. He threw
up the window to get a little air, but somehow the projecting masonry
of the old walls outside seemed to intercept it. He felt an oppression
in his breast, a desire to draw long breaths, to get more air into his
lungs. It was the same sensation which he had felt last night, and he
did not contemplate with any pleasure the idea of another long evening
alone in so strange an atmosphere. However, he must make the best of it.
He went to the bookshelf and got down again his _Trois Mousquetaires_.
When the candles were lighted, he would write a dutiful long letter to
his mother, and tell her all that had been going on about him,
especially that barbarous suggestion about the cottagers.

"Fancy me in the character of a rapacious landlord, turning a whole
community out of doors!" he said to himself, concocting the imaginary
letter, and laughed aloud with a thrill of indignation.

Next moment he started violently, and turned round with a wild rush of
blood to his head, and that sort of rallying and huddling together of
all the forces of his mind which one feels in a sudden catastrophe. It
was, however, no loud alarm that had sounded. It was the clear and
distinct vibration of a voice close to him, replying calmly to his
thought.

"Is there anything special in you to disqualify you for doing a
disagreeable duty?" some one said.

Walter had started back at the first sound, his heart giving a bound in
him of surprise--perhaps of terror. He had meant to take that great
chair by the fire as soon as he had taken his book from the shelf, so
that it must (he said to himself in instantaneous self-argument) have
been vacant then. It was not vacant now. A gentleman sat there, with his
face half turned towards the light looking towards the young man; his
attitude was perfectly easy, his voice a well-bred and cultivated voice.
There seemed neither hurry nor excitement about him. He had not the air
of a person newly entered, but rather of one who had been seated there
for some time at his leisure, observing what was going on. He lifted his
hand with a sort of deprecating yet commanding gesture.

"There is no occasion," he said, in his measured voice, "for alarm. I
have no intention of harming you, or any one. Indeed I am not aware that
I have any power of harm."

Never in his life before had Walter's soul been swept by such violent
sensations. He had an impulse of flight and of deadly overwhelming
terror, and then of sickening shame at his own panic. Why should he be
afraid? He felt dimly that this moment was the crisis of his life, and
that if he fled or retreated he was lost. He stood his ground, grasping
the back of a chair to support himself.

"Who are you?" he said.

"That is a searching question," said the stranger, with a smile. "We
will come to it by and by. I should like to know in the first place what
there is in you which makes it impossible to act with justice in certain
circumstances?"

The air of absolute and calm superiority with which he put this question
was beyond description.

Walter felt like a criminal at the bar.

"Who are you?" he repeated hoarsely. He stood with a curious sense of
being supported only by the grasp which he had taken of the back of the
chair, feeling himself a mere bundle of impulses and sensations, hardly
able to keep himself from flight, hardly able to keep from falling down
at the feet of this intruder, but holding to a sort of self-restraint by
his grasp upon the chair. Naturally, however, his nerves steadied as the
moments passed. The first extreme shock of surprise wore away. There was
nothing to alarm the most timid in the countenance upon which he gazed.
It was that of a handsome man who had scarcely turned middle age, with
grey but not white hair very thin on the forehead and temples, a high
delicate aquiline nose, and colourless complexion. His mouth closed
somewhat sternly, but had a faint melting of a smile about it, by
movements which were ingratiating and almost sweet. The chief thing
remarkable about the stranger, however, besides the extraordinary
suddenness of his appearance, was the perfect composure with which he
sat, like a man who not only was the most important person wherever he
went, but also complete master of the present scene. It was the young
man who was the intruder, not he.

"I will tell you presently who I am," he said. "In the mean time
explain to me why you should be horrified at a step which better men
than yourself take every day. Sit down." The stranger allowed himself to
smile with distinct intention, and then said in a tone of which it is
impossible to describe the refined mockery, "You are afraid?"

Walter came to himself with another sensible shock: his pride, his
natural spirit, a certain impulse of self-defence which never forsakes a
man, came to his aid. He was inclined to say "No," with natural denial
of a contemptuous accusation; but rallying more and more every moment,
answered with something like defiance, "Yes--or rather I am not afraid.
I am startled. I want to know how you come here, and who you are who
question me--in my own house."

"You are very sure that it is your own house? You mean to have it
restored and made into a piece of sham antiquity--if nothing prevents?"

"What can prevent? if I say it is to be done," cried the young man. His
blood seemed to curdle in his veins when he heard the low laugh with
which alone the stranger replied. "May I ask you--to withdraw or to tell
me who you are?" he said. His voice trembled in spite of himself. The
words left his lips quite sturdily, but quivered when they got into the
air, or so in the fantastic hurry of his mind he thought.

"If I refuse, what then?" the stranger said.

These two individuals confronted each other, defying each other, one
angry and nervous, the other perfectly calm. In such circumstances only
one result is sure: that he who retains his self-possession will have
the mastery. Walter felt himself completely baffled. He could not turn
out with violence a dignified and serious visitor, who assumed indeed an
intolerable superiority, and had come in without asking leave, but yet
was evidently a person of importance--if nothing more. He stared at him
for a moment, gradually becoming familiarized with the circumstances.
"You are master of the situation," he said, with a hard-drawn breath. "I
suppose I can do nothing but submit. But if politeness on my part
requires this of me, it requires on yours some information. Your name,
your object?"

They looked at each other once more for a moment.

"When you put it in that way, I have nothing to say," said the stranger,
with great courtesy; "but to acknowledge your right to require--"

At that moment the door opened hurriedly, and Symington came in.

"Your lordship will be wanting something?" he said. "I heard your voice.
Was it to light the lights? or would it be for tea, or----"

He gave a sort of scared glance round the room, and clung to the handle
of the door, but his eyes did not seem to distinguish the new-comer in
the failing twilight.

"I did not call; but you may light the candles," Walter said, feeling
his own excitement, which had been subsiding, spring up again, in his
curiosity to see what Symington's sensations would be.

The old man came in reluctantly. He muttered something uneasily in his
throat. "I would have brought a light if I had known. You might have
cried down the stairs. It's just out of all order to light the lights
this gate," he muttered. But he did not disobey. He went round the room
lighting one after another of the twinkling candles in the sconces. Now
and then he gave a scared and tremulous look about him; but he took no
further notice. The stranger sat quite composedly, looking on with a
smile while this process was gone through. Then Symington came up to the
table in front of which Walter still stood.

"Take a seat, my lord, take a seat," he said. "It's no canny to see you
standing just glowering frae ye, as we say in the country. You look just
as if you were seeing something. And take you your French fallow that
you were reading last night. It's better when you're by yourself in an
auld house like this, that has an ill-name, always to do something to
occupy your thoughts."

Walter looked at the stranger, who made a little gesture of intelligence
with a nod and smile; and old Symington followed the look, still with
that scared expression on his face.

"Your lordship looks for all the world as if you were staring at
something in that big chair; you must be careful to take no fancies in
your head," the old servant said. He gave a little nervous laugh, and
retreated somewhat quickly towards the door. "And talk no more to
yourself; it's an ill habit," he added, with one more troubled glance
round him as he closed the door.




CHAPTER XIII.


"And so you have made acquaintance with the young lord--tell us what
kind of person he is, Mrs. Forrester--tell us what you think of him,
Oona."

This was the unanimous voice which rose from the party assembled on the
second day after Walter's visit in the drawing-room in the Isle.

It was by no means out of the world, though to all appearances so far
removed from its commotions. A low cottage-mansion on the crest of a
rock, in the middle of Loch Houran, six miles from the railway at the
nearest spot on which you could land, and with a mile or so of water,
often rough, between you and the post-office, is it possible to imagine
a more complete seclusion? and yet it was not a seclusion at all. Oona
cared very little for the roughness of the water between the Isle and
the post-office, and Hamish nothing at all, and news came as constantly
and as regularly to the two ladies on their island as to any
newspaper--news from all quarters of the world. The mail days were
almost as important to them--in one way far more important than to any
merchant in his office. Budgets came and went every week, and both Oona
and her mother would be busy till late at night, the little gleam of
their lighted windows shining over the dark loch, that no one might miss
his or her weekly letter. These letters went up into the hill countries
in India, far away to the borders of Cashmere, round the world to
Australia, dropt midway into the coffee groves of Ceylon. When one of
the boys was quartered in Canada, to which there is a mail three times a
week, _that_ looked like next parish, and they thought nothing of it.
Neither need it be supposed that this was the only enlivenment of their
lives. The loch, though to the tourist it looks silent enough, was in
fact fringed by a number of houses in which the liveliest existence was
going on. The big new house at the point, which had been built by a
wealthy man of Glasgow, with every possible splendour, threw the
homelier houses of the native gentry a little into the shade; but nobody
bore him any malice, his neighbours being all so well aware that their
own "position" was known and unassailable, that his finery and his
costliness gave them no pang. They were all a little particular about
their "position:" but then nobody on the loch could make any mistake
about that, or for a moment imagine that Mr. Williamson from Glasgow
could rival the Scotts of Inverhouran, the Campbells of Ellermore, of
Glentruan, and half a dozen names beside, or the Forresters of
Eaglescairn, or the old Montroses, who, in fact, were a branch of the
Macnabs, and held their house on the Isle from that important but
extinct clan. This was so clearly understood that there was not an
exception made to the Williamsons, who knew their place, and were very
nice, and made a joke of their money, which was their social standing
ground. They had called their house, which was as big as a castle, in
the most unobtrusive manner, Birkenbraes, thus proving at once that they
were new people and Lowlanders: so much better taste, everybody said,
than any pretence at Highland importance or name. And this being once
acknowledged, the gentry of the loch adopted the Williamsons cordially,
and there was not a word to be said. But all the Campbells about, and
those excellent Williamsons, and a few families who were not Campbells,
yet belonged to Loch Houran, kept a good deal of life "on the loch,"
which was a phrase that meant in the district generally. And the Isle
was not a dull habitation, whatever a stranger might think. There was
seldom a day when a boat or two was not to be seen, sometimes for hours
together, drawn up upon the rocky beach. And the number of persons
entertained by Mrs. Forrester at the early dinner which was politely
called luncheon would have appeared quite out of proportion with her
means by any one unacquainted with Highland ways. There was trout from
the loch, which cost nothing except Hamish's time, a commodity not too
valuable, and there was grouse during the season, which cost still less,
seeing it came from all the sportsmen about. And the scones, of every
variety known in Scotland, which is a wide word, were home-made. So
that hospitality reigned, and yet Mrs. Forrester, who was a skilled
housekeeper, and Mysie, to whom the family resources were as her own,
and its credit still more precious than her own, managed somehow to make
ends meet.

On this particular afternoon the drawing-room with all its slim sofas
and old-fashioned curiosities was full of Campbells, for young Colin of
Ellermore was at home for his holiday, and it was a matter of course
that his sisters and Tom, the youngest, who was at home reading (very
little) for his coming examination, should bring him to the Isle. Colin
was rather a finer gentleman than flourished by nature upon the loch. He
had little company ways which made his people laugh; but when he had
been long enough at home to forget these he was very nice they all said.
He was in London, and though in trade, in "tea," which is rather
aristocratic, he was in society too.

"What kind of person is he, Mrs. Forrester? Tell us what you think of
him, Oona," was what this youthful band said.

"Well, my dears," said Mrs. Forrester, "he is just a very nice young
man. I don't know how I can describe him better, for young men
now-a-days are very like one another. They all wear the same
clothes--not but what," she added graciously, "I would know Colin
anywhere for a London gentleman with his things all so well made: but
Lord Erradeen was just in a kind of tweed suit, and nothing remarkable.
And his hands in his pockets, like all of ye. But he answered very
nicely when I spoke to him, and said he was more used to Walter Methven
than to any other name, and that to be neighbourlike would just be his
pleasure. It is not possible to be more pleasant and well-spoken than
the young man was."

"Oh, but I want a little more," cried Marjorie Campbell; "that tells
nothing; is he fair, or is he dark? is he tall or is he little--is he--"

"He couldn't be little," cried Janet, indignantly, "or he would not be a
hero: and I've made up my mind he's to be a hero. He'll have to do
something grand, but I don't know what: and to spoil it all with making
him small--"

"Heroes are all short," said Tom, "and all the great generals. You don't
want weedy, long-legged fellows like Colin and the rest of them. But you
know they all run to legs in our family, all but me."

"All this is irrelevant," said Colin with a smile which was somewhat
superior, "and you prevent Mrs. Forrester from giving us the masterly
characterisation which I know is on her lips."

"You are just a flatterer," said that simple lady, shaking her finger at
him; "there was no character coming from my lips. He is just a fine
simple-hearted young man. It appears he never knew what he was heir to,
and has no understanding even now, so far as I could learn, about the
Erradeens. He told me he had been a thoughtless lad, and, as well as I
could judge just a handful to his poor mother; but that all that was
over and gone."

"You are going too far, mamma," said Oona. "He said he had 'loafed.'
Loafing means no harm, does it, Colin? It means mere idleness, and no
more."

"Why should you think I am an authority on the subject?" said Colin. "I
never loaf: I go to the City every day. When I come back I have to keep
up society, so far as I can, and hunt about for invitations, otherwise I
should never be asked out. That is not loafing, it is hard work."

"Ask me, Oona," said young Tom; "I can tell you. It is the nicest thing
in the world. It means just doing nothing you are wanted to do, taking
your own way, watching nature, don't you know, and studying men, and
that sort of thing, which all the literary people say is better than
cramming. But only it does not pay in an exam."

"Oh, hold your tongue, Tommy," cried his sister. "You will fail again,
you know you will, and papa will be in despair. For you are not like
Colin, who is clever; you are good for nothing but soldiering, and next
year you will be too old."

"It's a shame," cried Tom hotly, "to make a fellow's commission depend
upon his spelling. What has spelling to do with it? But I'm going into
the militia, and then I shall be all right."

"And did Erradeen," said Colin to Mrs. Forrester, "let out any of the
secrets of his prison-house?"

"Bless me, he looked just as cheerful as yourself or even as Tom. There
was nothing miserable about him," Mrs. Forrester replied. "He had been
all the morning enjoying himself on the loch, and he came up and ate his
lunch just very hearty, and as happy as possible, with Oona and me. He
was just very like my own Ronald or Rob: indeed I think there's
something in his complexion and his way of holding himself that is very
like Rob; and took my opinion about the old castle, and what was the
meaning of the light on the tower. Indeed," added Mrs. Forrester with a
laugh, "I don't know if it is anything in me that draws people to tell
me their stories, but it is a very general thing, especially for young
persons, to ask for my advice."

"Because you're so kind," said Janet Campbell, who was romantic and
admired the old beauty.

"Because you're so clever," said Marjorie, who had a turn for satire.

Oona, whose ear was very quick for any supposed or possible ridicule,
such as her mother's little foibles occasionally laid her open to,
turned quickly round from Tom, leaving him speaking, and with a little
heightened colour interposed.

"We are opposite to the castle night and day," she said. "We cannot go
out to the door or gather a flower without seeing it; and at night there
it is in the moonlight. So naturally we are better acquainted with what
happens than anybody else can be."

"And do you really, really believe in the light?" said Marjorie.

Ellermore lay quite at the other end of the great loch, among another
range of hills, and was shut out from personal acquaintance with the
phenomena of Kinloch Houran. Colin gave a slight laugh, the faintest
possible indication of incredulity, to repeat with an increase of force
the doubt in his sister's tone. Oona was not without a healthful little
temper, which showed in the flash of her eye and the reddening of her
cheek. But she answered very steadily, with much suppressed feeling in
her tone--

"What do you call believing?" she said. "You believe in things you
cannot see? then I don't believe in the Kinloch Houran light. Because I
see it, and have seen it a hundred times as clear as day."

At this there was a little pause among the party of visitors, that pause
of half-amused superiority and scepticism, with which all believers in
the mysterious are acquainted. And then Marjorie, who was the boldest,
replied--

"Papa says it is a sort of phosphorescence, which is quite explainable:
and that where there is so much decaying matter, and so much damp, and
so much----"

"Faith, perhaps," said Colin, with that slight laugh; "but we are
outsiders, and we have no right to interfere with the doctrines of the
loch. Oona, give us that credit that we are outside the circle, and you
must not send us to the stake."

"Oh, my dears," said Mrs. Forrester, "and that is quite true. I have
heard very clever men say that there was nothing made so much difference
in what you believed as just the place you were born in, and that people
would go the stake, as you say, on one side of the border for a thing
they just laughed at on the other."

This, which was a very profound deliverance for Mrs. Forrester, she
carried off at the end with a pretty profession of her own disabilities.

"I never trust to my own judgment," she said. "But Oona is just very
decided on the subject, and so are all our people on the isle, and I
never put myself forward one way or another. Are you sure you will not
take a cup of tea before you go? a cup of tea is never out of place. It
is true that the day is very short, and Colin, after his town life, will
be out of the way of rowing. You are just going across by the ferry, and
then driving? Well, that is perhaps the best way. And in that case there
is plenty of time for a cup of tea. Just ring the bell, or perhaps it
will be safer, Oona, if you will cry upon Mysie and tell her to lose no
time. Just the tea, and a few of the cream scones, and a little cake.
She need not spread the table as there is so little time."

The interlude of the tea and the cream scones made it late before the
visitors got away. Their waggonette was visible waiting for them on the
road below Auchnasheen, and five minutes were enough to get them
across, so that they dallied over this refreshment with little thought
of the waning afternoon. Then there was a little bustle to escort them
down to the beach, to see them carefully wrapped up, to persuade
Marjorie that another "hap" would be desirable, and Janet that her
"cloud" should be twisted once more about her throat. The sunset was
waning when at last they were fairly off, and the loch lay in a still,
yellow radiance, against which every tree and twig, every rock and
stone, stood out dark in full significance of outline. It was cold, and
Mrs. Forrester shivered in her furred cloak.

"The shore looks so near that you could touch it," she said; "there will
be rain to-morrow, Oona."

"What does it matter about to-morrow?" cried the girl; "it's beautiful
to-night. Go in, mamma, to the fireside; but I will stay here and see
them drive away."

The mother consented to this arrangement, which was so natural; but a
moment afterwards came back and called from the porch, where she stood
sheltered from the keen and eager air.

"Oona! Come in, my dear. That Colin one, with his London ways, will
think you are watching him."

There was something sublime in the fling of Oona's head, and the
erection of her slim figure, as she rejected the possibility.

"Watching _him_!" She was too proud even to permit herself to resent it.

"Ah! but you never can tell what a silly lad may take into his head,"
said Mrs. Forrester; and, having thus cleared her conscience, she went
in and took off her cloak, and shut the drawing-room door, and made
herself very comfortable in her own cosy chair in the ruddy firelight.
She laid her head back upon the soft cushions and looked round her with
a quiet sense of content. Everything was so comfortable, so pretty and
homelike; and by-and-by she permitted herself, for ten minutes or so, to
fall into a soft oblivion. "I just closed my eyes," was Mrs. Forrester's
little euphemism to herself.

Meanwhile Oona stood and looked at sky and sea and shore. The soft plash
of the oars came through the great stillness, and, by-and-by, there was
the sound of the boat run up upon the shingle, and the noise of the
disembarkation, the voices swelling out in louder tones and laughter. As
they waved their hands in a final good-night to the watcher on the isle
before they drove away, the young people, as Mrs. Forrester had said,
laughed and assured Colin that it was not for them Oona stood out in the
evening chill. But, as a matter of fact, there was nothing so little in
Oona's mind. She was looking round her with that sort of exaltation
which great loneliness and stillness and natural beauty so naturally
give: the water gleaming all round, the sky losing its orange glow and
melting into soft primrose tints the colour of the daffodil.

    "The holy time is quiet as a nun
        Breathless with adoration."

All the sensations that belong to such a moment are exquisite; a
visionary elevation above the earth and all things earthly, a soft
pensiveness, an elation, yet wistful longing of the soul. Before her the
old castle of Kinloch Houran lay gloomy and dark on the edge of the
water. If she thought of anything it was of the young neighbour, to whom
she felt so strangely near in wonder and sympathy. Who might be with him
at that moment in the ghostly quiet? What thoughts, what suggestions,
were being placed before him? Oona put her hands together, and breathed
into the still air a wish of wondering and wistful pity which was almost
a prayer. And then, rousing herself with a slight shiver and shake, she
turned and went in, shutting out behind her the lingering glory of the
water and sky.

Mysie was lighting the candles when she went in, and Mrs. Forrester had
opened her eyes. Two candles on the mantelpiece and two on the table
were all the ladies allowed themselves, except on great occasions, when
the argand lamp, which was the pride of the household, was lighted in
honour of a visitor. The warmth of this genial interior was very welcome
after the cold of the twilight, and Oona brought her work to the table,
and the book from which her mother was in the habit of reading aloud.
Mrs. Forrester thought she improved her daughter's mind by these
readings; but, to tell the truth, Oona's young soul, with all the world
and life yet before it, often fled far enough away while her mother's
soft voice, with the pretty tricks of elocution, which were part of her
old-fashioned training, went on. Never was there a prettier indoor
scene. In the midst of that great solitude of woods and water, the
genial comfort of this feminine room, so warm, so softly lighted, so
peaceful and serene, struck the imagination like a miracle. Such a
tranquil retirement would have been natural enough safely planted amid
the safeguards and peaceful surroundings of a village: but in being here
there was a touching incongruity. The little play of the mother's voice
as she read with innocent artifice and the simple vanity which belonged
to her, the pretty work, of no great use, with which the girl was busy,
both heightened the sense of absolute trust with which they lived in the
bosom of nature. A sudden storm, one could not but think, might have
swept them away into the dark gleaming water that hemmed them round.
They were not afraid: they were as safe as in a citadel. They were like
the birds in their nests; warm and soft, though in the heart of Loch
Houran. Mrs. Forrester was reading a historical novel, one of the kind
which she thought so good for improving Oona's mind; amusing, yet
instructing her. But Oona's mind, refusing to be improved, was giving
only a mechanical attention. It was away making a little pilgrimage of
wonder about the mystic house which was so near them, longing to know,
and trying to divine, what was going on there.

But when the afternoon closes in at four o'clock, and the candles are
lighted shortly after, the night is long. It seemed endless on this
occasion, because of the too early tea, which Mrs. Forrester had thought
it would be "just a farce" to produce again at six o'clock, their usual
hour; and from half-past four till nine, when the small and light repast
known in the house under the pleasantly indefinite name of "the tray"
made its appearance, is a long time. There had been two or three
interruptions of a little talk, and the book had been laid down and
resumed again, and Oona's work had dropped two or three times upon her
knee, when Mysie, coming in, announced that it was just an uncommon fine
night, though all the signs (including the glass, which, however, does
not always count in the west of Scotland) pointed to rain, and that
Hamish was going to take advantage of the moonlight to do an errand at
the village above Auchnasheen. Would Miss Oona like to go? It was just
awfu' bonny, and with plenty of haps she could take no harm, Mysie said.
To see how the girl sprang from her seat was a proof of the gentle
tedium that had stolen upon her soul.

"But, my dear, it will be cold, cold. I am afraid of you catching cold,
Oona," Mrs. Forrester cried.

"Oh, mother, no. I never catch cold; and besides, if I did, what would
it matter? Tell him I'm coming, Mysie; tell him to wait for me. I'll put
on my thick ulster, or the fur cloak, if you like."

"Certainly, the fur cloak, Oona. I will not hear of it without that.
But, my dear, just think, Hamish will have to leave you in the boat
while he goes to the village; and what would you do, Oona, if there is
any one on the road?"

"Do, mamma? Look at them, to see if I knew them. And, if it was a
stranger, just sit still and say nothing."

"But, my dear! It might be somebody that would speak to you, and--annoy
you, Oona."

"There is no person up the loch or down the loch that would dare to do
that, mem," said Mysie, composedly.

"How can we tell? It might be some tourist or gangrel body."

"Annoy _me_!" said Oona, as if indeed this suggestion was too
far-fetched for possibility. "If anything so ridiculous happened I would
just push out into the loch. Don't you trouble, mother, about me."

Mrs. Forrester got up to envelop her child's throat in fold after fold
of the fleecy white "cloud." She shook her head a little, but she was
resigned, for such little controversies occurred almost daily. The
evening had changed when Oona ran lightly down the bank to the boat in
which Hamish was waiting. Everything about was flooded with the keen,
clear white moonlight, which in its penetrating chilly fashion was
almost more light than day. The loch was shining like silver, but with a
blackness behind the shining, and all the shadows were like midnight
profound in inky gloom. The boat seemed to hang suspended in the keen
atmosphere rather than to float, and the silence was shrill, and seemed
to cut into the soul. It was but a few minutes across the cold white
glittering strait that lay between the isle and the mainland. Hamish
jumped out with an exaggerated noise upon the slippery shingle, and
fastened the boat with a rattle of the ring to which it was attached,
which woke echoes all around both from land and water, everything under
the mingled influence of winter and night being so still. A chance
spectator would have thought that the mother had very good cause for her
alarm, and that to sit there in the rough boat absolutely alone, like
the one living atom in a world all voiceless and asleep, was not a
cheerful amusement for a girl. But Oona had neither fear nor sense of
strangeness in an experience which she had gone through so often. She
called out lightly to Hamish to make haste, and looked after him as he
set out on the white road, the peculiarities of his thick-set figure
coming out drolly in the curious dab of foreshortened shadow flung upon
the road by his side. She laughed at this to herself, and the laugh ran
all about with a wonderful cheerful thrill of the silence. How still it
was! When her laugh ceased, there was nothing but the steps of Hamish in
all the world--and by and by even the steps ceased, and that stillness
which could be felt settled down. There was not a breath astir, not
enough to cause the faintest ripple on the beach. Now and then a pebble
which had been pushed out of its place by the man's foot toppled over,
and made a sound as if something great had fallen. Otherwise not a
breath was stirring; the shadows of the fir-trees looked as if they
were gummed upon the road. And Oona held her breath; it seemed almost
profane to disturb the intense and perfect quiet. She knew every hue of
every rock, and the profile of every tree. And presently, which no doubt
was partly because of this perfect acquaintance, and partly because of
some mesmeric consciousness in the air, such as almost invariably
betrays the presence of a human being, her eyes fixed upon one spot
where the rock seemed higher than she had been used to. Was it possible
that somebody was there? She changed her place to look more closely; and
so fearless was the girl that she had nearly jumped out of the boat to
satisfy herself whether it was a man or a rock. But just when she was
about making up her mind to do so, the figure moved, and came down
towards the beach. Oona's heart gave a jump; several well-authenticated
stories which she had heard from her childhood came into her mind with a
rush. She took the end of the rope softly in her hand so as to be able
to detach it in a moment. To row back to the isle was easy enough.

"Is it you, Miss Forrester?" a voice said.

Oona let go the rope, and her heart beat more calmly. "I might with more
reason cry out, Is it you, Lord Erradeen? for if you are at the old
castle you are a long way from home, and I am quite near."

"I am at Auchnasheen," he said. A great change had come over his tone;
it was very grave; no longer the airy voice of youth which had jested
and laughed on the Isle. He came down and stood with his hand on the
bow of the boat. He looked very pale, very serious, but that might be
only the blackness of the shadows and the whiteness of the light.

"Did you ever see so spiritual a night?" said Oona. "There might be
anything abroad; not fairies, who belong to summer, but serious things."

"Do you believe then in--ghosts?" he said.

"Ghosts is an injurious phrase. Why should we call the poor people so
who are only--dead?" said Oona. "But that is a false way of speaking
too, isn't it? for it is not because they are dead, but living, that
they come back."

"I am no judge," he said, with a little shiver. "I never have thought on
the subject. I suppose superstition lingers longer up among the
mountains."

"Superstition!" said Oona, with a laugh. "What ugly words you use!"

Once more the laugh seemed to ripple about, and break the solemnity of
the night. But young Lord Erradeen was as solemn as the night, and his
countenance was not touched even by a responsive smile. His gravity
produced upon the girl's mind that feeling of visionary panic and
distrust which had not been roused by the external circumstances. She
felt herself grow solemn too, but struggled against it.

"Hamish has gone up with some mysterious communication to the
game-keeper," she said; "and in these long nights one is glad of a
little change. I came out with him to keep myself from going to sleep."

Which was not perhaps exactly true: but there had arisen a little
embarrassment in her mind, and she wanted something to say.

"And I came out--" he said; then paused. "The night is not so ghostly as
the day," he added, hurriedly; "nor dead people so alarming as the
living."

"You mean that you disapprove of our superstitions, as you call them,"
said Oona. "Most people laugh and believe a little; but I know some are
angry and think it wrong."

"I----angry! That was not what I meant. I meant----It is a strange
question which is living and which is----To be sure, you are right, Miss
Forrester. What is dead cannot come in contact with us, only what is
living. It is a mystery altogether."

"You are not a sceptic then?" said Oona. "I am glad of that."

"I am not----anything. I don't know how to form an opinion. How lovely
it is, to be sure," he burst out all at once; "especially to have some
one to talk to. That is the great charm."

"If that is all," said Oona, trying to speak cheerfully, "you will soon
have dozens of people to talk to, for everybody in the county--and that
is a wide word--is coming to call. They will arrive in shoals as soon as
they know."

"I think I shall go--in a day or two," he said.

At this moment the step of Hamish, heard far off through the great
stillness, interrupted the conversation. It had been as if they two were
alone in this silent world; and the far-off step brought in a third and
disturbed them. They were silent, listening as it came nearer and
nearer, the sound growing with every repetition. When Hamish appeared in
the broad white band of road coming from between the shadows of the
trees the young man dropped his hand from the bow of the boat. He had
not spoken again, nor did Oona feel herself disposed to speak. Hamish
quickened his pace when he saw another figure on the beach.

"Ye'll no' have been crying upon me, Miss Oona," he said, with a
suspicious look at the stranger.

"Oh no, Hamish!" cried Oona, cheerfully. "I have not been wearying at
all, for this is Lord Erradeen that has been so kind as to come and keep
me company."

"Oh, it'll be my Lord Erradeen?" said Hamish, with a curious look into
Walter's face.

Then there was a repetition of the noises with which the still loch
rang, the rattle of the iron ring, the grating of the bow on the shingle
as she was pushed off. Hamish left no time for leave-taking. There were
a few yards of clear water between the boat and the beach when Oona
waved her hand to the still figure left behind. "My mother will like to
see you to-morrow," she cried, with an impulse of sympathy. "Good
night."

He took his hat off, and waved his hand in reply, but said nothing, and
stood motionless till they lost sight of him round the corner of the
isle. Then Hamish, who had been exerting himself more than usual, paused
a little.

"Miss Oona," he said, "yon will maybe be the young lord, but maybe no. I
would not be speaking to the first that comes upon the loch side----"

"Oh, if you are beginning to preach propriety----" the girl cried.

"It'll not be propriety, it will just be that they're a family that is
not canny. Who will tell you if it's one or if it's the other? Did ye
never hear the tale of the leddy that fell off the castle wall?"

"But this is not the castle," cried Oona, "and I know him very well--and
I'm sorry for him, Hamish. He looks so changed."

"Oh, what would you do being sorry for him? He has nothing ado with
us--nothing ado with us," Hamish said.

And how strange it was to come in again from that brilliant whiteness
and silence--the ghostly loch, the visionary night--into the ruddy room
full of firelight and warmth, all shut in, sheltered, full of
companionship.

"Come away, come away to the fire; you must be nearly frozen, Oona, and
I fear ye have caught your death of cold," her mother said.

Oona remembered with a pang the solitary figure on the water's edge, and
wondered if he were still standing there forlorn. A whole chapter of
life seemed to have interposed between her going and coming, though she
had been but half an hour away.




CHAPTER XIV.


Two days after this night scene there was a gathering such as was of
weekly occurrence in the Manse of Loch Houran parish. The houses were
far apart, and those of the gentry who were old-fashioned enough to
remain for the second service, were in the habit of spending the short
interval between in the minister's house, where an abundant meal, called
by his housekeeper a cold collation, was spread in the dining-room for
whosoever chose to partake. As it was the fashion in the country to dine
early on Sunday, this repast was but sparingly partaken of, and most of
the company, after the glass of wine or milk, the sandwich or biscuit,
which was all they cared to take, would sit round the fire in the
minister's library, or examine his books, or, what was still more
prized, talk to him of their own or their neighbours' affairs. The
minister of Loch Houran was one of those celibates who are always
powerful ecclesiastically, though the modern mind is so strongly opposed
to any artificial manufacture of them such as that which the Church of
Rome in her wisdom has thought expedient. We all know the arguments in
favour of a married clergy, but those on the other side of the question
it is the fashion to ignore. He who has kept this natural distinction by
fair means, and without compulsion, has however an unforced advantage of
his own which the most Protestant and the most matrimonial of polemics
will scarcely deny. He is more safe to confide in, being one, not two.
He is more detached and individual; it is more natural that all the
world about him should have a closer claim upon the man who has no
nearer claims to rival those of his spiritual children. Mr. Cameron was
one of this natural priesthood. If he had come to his present calm by
reason of passion and disappointment in his past, such as we obstinately
and romantically hope to have founded the tranquillity of subdued,
sunny, and sober age, nobody could tell. An old minister may perhaps be
let off more easily in this respect than an old monk; but he was the
friend and consoler of everybody; the depositary of all the secrets of
the parish; the one adviser of whose disinterestedness and secrecy every
perplexed individual was sure. He did all that man could do to be
absolutely impartial and divide himself, as he divided his provisions,
among his guests as their needs required. But flesh is weak, and Mr.
Cameron could not disown one soft place in his heart for Oona Forrester,
of which that young person was quite aware. Oona was his pupil and his
favourite, and he was, if not her spiritual director, which is a
position officially unknown to his Church, at least her confidant in all
her little difficulties, which comes to much the same thing: and this
notwithstanding the fact that Mrs. Forrester attended the parish church
under protest, and prided herself on belonging to the Scottish Episcopal
community, the Church of the gentry, though debarred by providence from
her privileges. Mrs. Forrester at this moment, with her feet on the
fender, was employed in bewailing this sad circumstance with another
landed lady in the same position; but Oona was standing by the old
ministers side, with her hand laid lightly within his arm, which was a
pretty way she had when she was with her oldest friend. It did not
interfere with this attitude, that he was exchanging various remarks
with other people, and scarcely talking to Oona at all. He looked down
upon her from time to time with a sort of proud tenderness, as her
grandfather might have done. It pleased the old man to feel the girl's
slim small fingers upon his arm. And as there were no secrets discussed
in this weekly assembly her presence interrupted nothing. She added her
word from time to time, or the still readier comment of smiles and
varying looks that changed like the Highland sky outside, and were never
for two minutes the same. It was not, however, till Mr. Shaw, the
factor, came in, that the easy superficial interest of all the parish
talk quickened into something more eager and warm in her sympathetic
countenance. Shaw's ruddy face was full of care; this was indeed its
usual expression, an expression all the more marked from the blunt and
open simplicity of its natural mood to which care seemed alien. The
puckers about his hazel grey eyes, the lines on his forehead which
exposure to the air had reddened rather than browned, were more than
usually evident. Those honest eyes seemed to be remonstrating with the
world and fate. They had an appearance half-comic to the spectator, but
by no means comic to their own consciousness of grieved interrogation as
if asking every one on whom they turned, "Why did you do it?" "Why did
you let it be done?" It was this look which he fixed upon the minister,
who indeed was most innocent of all share in the cause of his trouble.

"I told you," he said, "the other day, about the good intentions of our
young lord. I left various things with him to be settled that would bide
no delay--things that had been waiting for the late Lord Erradeen from
day to day. And all this putting off has been bad, bad. There's those
poor crofters that will have to be put out of their bits of places
to-morrow. I can hold off no longer without his lordship's warrant. And
not a word from him--not a word!" cried the good man, with that
appealing look, to which the natural reply was, It is not my fault. But
the minister knew better, and returned a look of sympathy, shaking his
white head.

"What has become of the young man? they tell me he has left the castle."

"He is not far off--he is at Auchnasheen; but he is just like all the
rest, full of goodwill one day, and just inaccessible the next--just
inaccessible!" repeated the factor. "And what am I to do? I am just wild
to have advice from somebody. What am I to do?"

"Can you not get at him to speak to him?" the minister asked.

"I have written to know if he will see me. I have said I was waiting an
answer, but there's no answer comes. They say he's on the hill all day,
though the keepers know nothing about his movements, and he does not
even carry a gun. What am I to do? He sees nobody; two or three have
called, but cannot get at him. He's always out--he's never there. That
old Symington goes about wringing his hands. What says he? he says,
'This is the worst of a'; this is the worst of a'. He's just got it on
him----'"

"What does that mean?"

"Can I tell what that means? According to the old wives it is the weird
of the Methvens; but you don't believe such rubbish, nor do I. It has,
maybe, something to do with the drainage, or the water, or the sanitary
arrangements, one way or the other!" cried the factor with a harsh and
angry laugh.

Then there was a momentary pause, and the hum of the other people's talk
came in, filling up with easier tones of conversation the somewhat
strained feeling of this: "He's a good shot and a fine oar, and just a
deevil for spunk and courage: and yet because he's a little vague in his
speaking!" "But, I say, we must put up with what we can get, and though
it's a trial the surplice is not just salvation." "And it turned out to
be measles, and not fever at all, and nothing to speak of; so we just
cheated the doctors." These were the broken scraps that came in to fill
up the pause.

"I saw Lord Erradeen the other night," said Oona, whose light grasp on
the old minister's arm had been tightening and slackening all through
this dialogue, in the interest she felt. Both of the gentlemen turned to
look at her inquiringly, and the girl blushed--not for any reason, as
she explained to herself indignantly afterwards, but because it was a
foolish way she had; but somehow the idea suggested to all their minds
was not without an effect upon the events of her after-life.

"And what did he say to you? and what is he intending? and why does he
shut himself up and let all the business hang suspended like yon fellow
Machomet's coffin?" cried the factor, with a guttural in the prophet's
name which was due to the energy of his feelings. He turned upon Oona
those remonstrating eyes of his, as if he had at last come to the final
cause of all the confusion, and meant to demand of her, without any
quibbling, an answer to the question, Why did you do it? on the spot.

"Indeed, he said very little to me, Mr. Shaw. He looked like a ghost,
and he said--he was going away in a day or two."

Sudden reflection in the midst of what she was saying made it apparent
to Oona that it was unnecessary to give all the details of the
interview. Mr. Cameron, for his part, laid his large, soft old hand
tenderly upon hers which was on his arm, and said, in the voice which
always softened when he addressed her--

"And where would that be, my bonnie Oona, that you met with Lord
Erradeen?"

"It was on the beach below Auchnasheen," said Oona, with an almost
indignant frankness, holding her head high, but feeling, to her anger
and distress, the blush burn upon her cheek. "Hamish had some errand on
shore, and I went with him in the boat. I was waiting for him, when some
one came down from the road and spoke to me. I was half-frightened, for
I did not know any one was there. It was Lord Erradeen."

"And what?--and why?--and--"

The factor was too much disturbed to form his questions reasonably, even
putting aside the evident fact that Oona had no answer to give him. But
at this moment the little cracked bell began to sound, which was the
warning that the hour of afternoon service approached. The ladies rose
from their seats round the fire, the little knots of men broke up.
"Oona, my dear, will ye come and tie my bonnet? I never was clever at
making a bow," said Mrs. Forrester; and the minister left his guests to
make his preparations for church. Mr. Shaw felt himself left in the
lurch. He kept hovering about Oona with a quick decision in his own
mind, which was totally unjustified by any foundation; he went summarily
through a whole romance, and came to its conclusion in the most
matter-of-fact and expeditious way. "If that comes to pass now!" he said
to himself. "_She's_ no Me'ven; there's no weird on her; he can give her
the management of the estates, and all will go well. She has a head upon
her shoulders, though she is nothing but a bit girlie--and there will be
me to make everything plain!" Such was the brief epitome of the
situation that passed in the factor's mind. He was very anxious to get
speech of Oona on the way to church, and it is to be feared that Mr.
Cameron's excellent afternoon discourse (which many people said was
always his best, though as it was listened to but drowsily the fact may
be doubted) made little impression upon Shaw, though he was a serious
man, who could say his say upon religious subjects, and was an elder,
and had sat in the Assembly in his day. He had his opportunity when the
service was over, when the boats were being pushed off from the beach,
and the carriages got under way, for those who had far to go. Mrs.
Forrester had a great many last words to say before she put on her
furred mantle and her white cloud, and took her place in the boat; and
Mysie, who stood ready with the mantle to place it on her mistress's
shoulders, had also her own little talks to carry on at that genial
moment when all the parish--or all the loch, if you like the expression
better--stood about exchanging friendly greetings and news from outlying
places. While all the world was thus engaged, Oona fell at last into the
hands of the factor, and became his prey.

"Miss Oona," he said, "if ye will accord me a moment, I would like well,
well, to know what's your opinion about Lord Erradeen."

"But I have no opinion!" cried Oona, who had been prepared for the
attack. She could not keep herself from blushing (so ridiculous! but I
will do it, she said to herself, as if that "I" was an independent
person over whom she had no control), but otherwise she was on her
guard. "How could I have any opinion when I have only seen Lord Erradeen
twice--thrice?" she added, with a heightening of the blush, as she
remembered the adventure of the coach.

"Twice--thrice; but that gives you facilities--and ladies are so
quick-witted. I've seen him but once," said the factor. "I was much
taken with him, that is the truth, and was so rash as to think our
troubles were over; but here has everything fallen to confusion in the
old way. Miss Oona, do you use your influence if you should see his
lordship again."

"But, Mr. Shaw, there is no likelihood that I shall see him again--and I
have no influence."

"Oh no, you'll not tell me that," said the factor, shaking his head,
with a troubled smile. "Them that are like you, young and bonnie, have
always influence, if they like to use it. And as for seeing him again,
he will never leave the place, Miss Oona, without going at least to bid
you good-bye."

"Lord Erradeen may come to take leave of my mother," said Oona, with
dignity. "It is possible, though he did not say so; but even if he
does, what can I do? I know nothing about his affairs, and I have no
right to say anything to him--no right, more than any one else who has
met him three times."

"Which is just no person--except yourself, so far as I can learn," the
factor said.

"After all, when you come to think of it, it is only once I have seen
him," said Oona, "for the night on the loch was by chance, and the day
on the coach I did not know him; so that after all I have only, so to
speak, seen him once, and how could I venture to speak to him about
business? Oh no, that is out of the question. Yes, mamma, I am quite
ready. Mr. Shaw wishes, if Lord Erradeen comes to bid us good-bye that
we should tell him----"

"Yes?" said Mrs. Forrester, briskly, coming forward, while Mysie
arranged around her her heavy cloak. "I am sure I shall be very glad to
give Lord Erradeen any message. He is a very nice young man, so far as I
can judge; people think him very like my Ronald, Mr. Shaw. Perhaps it
has not struck you? for likenesses are just one of the things that no
two people see. But we are very good friends, him and me: he is just a
nice simple gentlemanly young man--oh, very gentlemanly. He would never
go away without saying good-bye. And I am sure I shall be delighted to
give him any message. That will do, Mysie, that will do; do not
suffocate me with that cloak. Dear me, you have scarcely left me a
corner to breathe out of. But, Mr. Shaw, certainly--any message----"

"I am much obliged to you; but I will no doubt see Lord Erradeen myself,
and I'll not trouble a lady about business," said the factor. He cast a
look at Oona, in which with more reason than usual his eyes said, How
could you do it? And the girl was a little compunctious. She laughed,
but she felt guilty, as she took her mother's arm to lead her to the
boat. Mrs. Forrester had still a dozen things to say, and waved her
hands to the departing groups on every side, while Shaw, half-angry,
stood grimly watching the embarkation.

"There are the Kilhouran Campbells driving away, and I have not had a
word with them: and there is old Jess, who always expects to be taken
notice of: and the Ellermore folk, that I had no time to ask about Tom's
examination: and Mr. Cameron himself, that I never got a chance of
telling how well I liked the sermon. Dear me, Oona, you are always in
such a hurry! And take care now, take care; one would think you took me
for your own age. But I am not wanting to be hoisted up either, as if I
were too old to know how to step into a boat. Good-bye, Mr. Shaw,
good-bye," Mrs. Forrester added cheerfully, waving her hand as she got
herself safely established in the bow, and Hamish, not half so
picturesque as usual in his Sunday clothes, pushed off the boat.
"Good-bye, and I'll not forget your message." She even kissed her hand,
if not to him, to the parish in general, in the friendliness of her
heart.

Mr. Shaw had very nearly shaken his clenched fist in reply. Old fool he
called her in his heart, and even launched an expletive (silently) at
Oona, "the heartless monkey," who had betrayed him to her mother. He
went back to the manse with Mr. Cameron, when all the little talks and
consultations were over and everybody gone, and once more poured out the
story of his perplexities.

"If I do not hear from him, I'll have to proceed to extremities
to-morrow, and it is like to break my heart," he said. "For the poor
folk have got into their heads that I will stand their friend whatever
happens, and they are just keeping their minds easy."

"But, man, they should pay their rents," said Mr. Cameron, who, when all
was said that could be said in his favour, was not a Loch Houran man.

"Rents! where would you have them get the siller? Their bit harvest has
failed, and the cows are dry for want of fodder. If they have a penny
laid by they must take it to live upon. They have enough ado to live,
without thinking of rents."

"But in that case, Shaw," said the minister, gravely--"you must not
blame me for saying so, it's what all the wise men say--would they not
do better to emigrate, and make a new start in a new country, where
there's plenty of room?"

"Oh, I know that argument very well," said Shaw, with a snort of
indignation. "I have it all at my fingers' ends. I've preached it many a
day. But what does it mean, when all's done? It means just sheep or it
means deer, and a pickle roofless houses standing here and there, and
not a soul in the glen. There was a time even when I had just an
enthusiasm for it--and I've sent away as many as most. But after all,
they're harmless, God-fearing folk; the land is the better of them, and
none the worse. There's John Paterson has had great losses with his
sheep, and there's yon English loon that had the shooting, and shot
every feather on the place; both the one and the other will be far more
out of his lordship's pocket than my poor bit crofters. I laid all that
before him; and he showed a manful spirit, that I will always say. No,
minister, it was not to argue the case from its foundations that I came
to you. I know very well what the economists say. I think they're not
more than half right, though they're so cocksure. But if you'll tell me
what I should do----"

This, however, was what Mr. Cameron was not capable of. He said, after
an interval, "I will go to-morrow and try if I can see him, if you think
it would not be ill taken."

"To-morrow is the last day," said the factor gloomily: and after a
little while he followed the example of all the others, and sent for his
dog-cart and drove himself away. But a more anxious man did not traverse
any road in Great Britain on that wintry afternoon: and bitter thoughts
were in his heart of the capricious family, whose interests were in his
hands, and to whom he was almost too faithful a servant. "Oh, the weird
of the Me'vens!" said Mr. Shaw to himself, "if they were not so taken up
with themselves and took more thought for other folk we would hear
little of any weirds. I have no time for weirds. I have just my work to
do and I do it. The Lord preserve us from idleness, and luxury, and
occupation with ourselves!" Here the good man in his righteous wrath and
trouble and disappointment was unjust, as many a good man has been
before.

When Hamish had pushed off from the beach, and the little party were
afloat, Oona repented her of that movement of mingled offence and
_espièglerie_ which had made her transfer the factor's appeal from
herself to her mother: and it was only then that Mrs. Forrester
recollected how imperfect the communication was. "Bless me," Mrs.
Forrester said, "I forgot to ask after all what it was he wanted me to
say. That was a daft like thing, to charge me with a message and never
to tell me what it was. And how can I tell my Lord Erradeen! I suppose
you could not put back, Hamish, to inquire?--but there's nobody left
yonder at the landing that I can see, so it would be little use. How
could you let me do such a silly thing, Oona, my dear?"

"Most likely, mamma, we shall not see Lord Erradeen and so no harm will
be done."

"Not see Lord Erradeen! Do ye think then, Oona, that he has no manners,
or that he's ignorant how to behave? I wonder what has made ye take an
ill-will at such a nice young man. There was nothing in him to justify
it, that I could see. And to think I should have a message for him and
not know what it is! How am I to give him the message when it was never
given to me? I just never heard of such a dilemma. Something perhaps of
importance, and me charged to give it, and not to know what it was!"

"Maybe, mem," said Mysie from the other end of the boat, with that
serene certainty that her mistress's affairs were her own, which
distinguishes an old Scotch family retainer, "maybe Miss Oona will ken."

"Oh, yes, I suppose I know," said Oona, reluctantly. "It is something
about the cotters at the Truach-Glas, who will be turned out to-morrow
unless Lord Erradeen interferes; but why should we be charged with that?
We are very unlikely to see Lord Erradeen, and to-morrow is the day."

This piece of information caused a great excitement in the little party.
The cotters to be turned out!

"But no, no, that was just to frighten you. He will never do it," said
Mrs. Forrester, putting on a smile to reassure herself after a great
flutter and outcry. "No, no; it must just have been to give us all a
fright. John Shaw is a very decent man. I knew his father perfectly
well, who was the minister at Rannoch, and a very good preacher. No, no,
Oona, my dear--he could never do it; and yon fine lad that is so like
my Ronald (though you will not see it) would never do it. You need not
look so pale. It is just his way of joking with you. Many a man thinks
it pleasant to tell a story like that to a lady just to hear what she
says."

"Eh, but it's ill joking with poor folks' lives," cried Mysie, craning
over Hamish's shoulder to hear every word.

"It's none joking," said Hamish, gruffly, between the sweep of his oars.

"It's none joking, say ye? Na, it's grim earnest, or I'm sair mistaken,"
said the woman. "Eh, Miss Oona, but I would gang round the loch on my
bare feet, Sabbath though it be, rather than no give a message like
yon."

"How can we do it?" cried Oona; "how are we to see Lord Erradeen? I am
sure he will not come to call; and even if he did come to-morrow in the
afternoon it would be too late."

"My dear," said Mrs. Forrester, "we will keep a look out in the morning.
Hamish will just be fishing at the point, and hail him as soon as he
sees him. For it was in the morning he came before."

"Oh, mem!" cried Mysie, "but would you wait for that? It's ill to lippen
to a young man's fancy. He might be late of getting up (they're mostly
lazy in the morning), or he might be writing his letters, or he might be
seeing to his guns, or there's just a hundred things he might be doing.
What would ye say if, may-be, Miss Oona was to write one of her bonnie
little notties on that awfu' bonnie paper, with her name upon't, and
tell him ye wanted to see him at ten o'clock or eleven o'clock, or
whatever time you please?"

"Or we might go over to-night in the boat," said Hamish, laconically.

Mrs. Forrester was used to take much counsel. She turned from one to the
other with uncertain looks. "But, Oona," she said, "you are saying
nothing! and you are generally the foremost. If it is not just nonsense
and a joke of John Shaw's----"

"I think," said Oona, "that Mr. Shaw will surely find some other way;
but it was no joke, mother. Who would joke on such a subject? He said if
Lord Erradeen called we were to use our influence."

"That would I," said Mrs. Forrester, "use my influence. I would just tell
him, You must not do it. Bless me, a young man new in the country to
take a step like that and put every person against him! No, no, it is
not possible: but a lady," she added, bridling a little with her smile
of innocent vanity, "a lady may say anything--she may say things that
another person cannot. I would just tell him, You must not do it! and
that would be all that would be needed. But bless me, Oona, how are we
to use our influence unless we can see him?--and I cannot see how we are
to get at him."

"Oh, mem!" cried Mysie, impeding Hamish's oars as she stretched over his
shoulder, "just one of Miss Oona's little notties!"

But this was a step that required much reflection, and at which the
anxious mother shook her head.




CHAPTER XV.


It had rained all night, and the morning was wet and cold; the water
dull like lead, the sky a mass of clouds; all the bare branches of the
trees dropping limp in the humid air. Mrs. Forrester, on further
thought, had not permitted Oona to write even the smallest of her "bit
notties" to Lord Erradeen; for, though she lived on an isle in Loch
Houran, this lady flattered herself that she knew the world. She indited
a little epistle of her own, in which she begged him to come and see her
upon what she might call a matter of business--a thing that concerned
his own affairs. This was carried by Hamish, but it received no reply.
Lord Erradeen was out. Where could he be out on a Sabbath day at night,
in a place where there were no dinner parties, nor any club, nor the
temptations of a town, but just a lonely country place? Nor was there
any answer in the morning, which was more wonderful still. It was
ill-bred, Mrs. Forrester thought, and she was more than ever glad that
her daughter had not been involved in the matter. But Hamish had
information which was not communicated to the drawing-room, and over
which Mysie and he laid their heads together in the kitchen. The poor
young gentleman was off his head altogether, the servants said. The door
was just left open, and he came in, nobody knew when. He could not bear
that anybody should say a word to him. There had been thoughts among
them of sending for his mother, and old Symington showed to Hamish a
telegram prepared for Mr. Milnathort, acquainting him with the state of
affairs, which he had not yet ventured to send--"For he will come to
himself soon or syne," the old man said; "it's just the weird of the
Me'vens that is upon him." Symington was indifferent to the fate of the
poor crofters. He said "the factor will ken what to do." He was not a
Loch Houran man.

On the Monday, however, the feeling of all the little population on the
isle ran very high. The wet morning, the leaden loch, the low-lying
clouds oppressed the mental atmosphere, and the thought of the poor
people turned out of their houses in the rain, increased the misery of
the situation in a way scarcely to be expected in the west, where it is
supposed to rain for ever. At eleven o'clock Oona appeared in her
thickest ulster and her strongest boots.

"I am going up to see old Jenny," she said, with a little air of
determination.

"My dear, you will be just wet through; and are you sure your boots are
thick enough? You will come back to me with a heavy cold, and then what
shall we all do? But take some tea and sugar in your basket, Oona,"
said her mother. She went with the girl to the door in spite of these
half-objections, which did not mean anything. "And a bottle of my ginger
cordial might not be amiss--they all like it, poor bodies! And, Oona,
see, my dear, here are two pound notes. It's all I have of change, and
it's more than I can afford; but if it comes to the worst----But surely,
surely John Shaw, that is a very decent man, and comes of a good family,
will have found the means to do something!"

The kind lady stood at the door indifferent to the wet which every
breath of air shook from the glistening branches. It had ceased to rain,
and in the west there was a pale clearness, which made the leaden loch
more chilly still, yet was a sign of amelioration. Mrs. Forrester wrung
her hands, and cast one look at the glistening woods of Auchnasheen, and
another at the dark mass, on the edge of the water, of Kinloch Houran.
She did not know whether to be angry with Lord Erradeen for being so
ill-bred, or to compassionate him for the eclipse which he had
sustained. But, after all, he was a very secondary object in her mind in
comparison with Oona, whose course she watched in the boat, drawing a
long line across the leaden surface of the water. She was just like the
dove out of the ark, Mrs. Forrester thought.

The little hamlet of Truach-Glas was at some distance from the loch.
Oona walked briskly along the coach road for two miles or thereabouts,
then turned up to the left on a road which narrowed as it ascended till
it became little more than a cart track, with a footway at the side. In
the broader valley below a substantial farmhouse, with a few outlying
cottages, was the only point of habitation, and on either side of the
road a few cultivated fields, chiefly of turnips and potatoes, were all
that broke the stretches of pasture, extending to the left as high as
grass would grow, up the dark slopes of the hills. But the smaller glen
on the right had a more varied and lively appearance, and was broken
into small fields bearing signs of cultivation tolerably high up, some
of them still yellow with the stubble of the late harvest, the poor
little crop of oats or barley which never hoped to ripen before October,
if then. A mountain stream, which was scarcely a thread of water in the
summer, now leaped fiercely enough, turbid and swollen, from rock to
rock in its rapid descent. The houses clustered on a little tableland at
some height above the road, where a few gnarled hawthorns, rowans, and
birches were growing. They were poor enough to have disgusted any social
reformer, or political economist; grey growths of rough stones, which
might have come together by chance, so little shape was there in the
bulging walls. Only a few of them had even the rough chimney at one end
wattled with ropes of straw, which showed an advanced civilisation. The
others had nothing but the hole in the roof, which is the first and
homeliest expedient of primitive ventilation. It might have been
reasonably asked what charm these hovels could have to any one to make
them worth struggling for. But reason is not lord of all.

There was no appearance of excitement about the place when Oona, walking
quickly, and a little out of breath, reached the foremost houses. The
men and boys were out about their work, up the hill, or down the water,
in the occupations of the day; and indeed there were but few men, at any
time, about the place. Three out of the half-dozen houses were tenanted
by "widow women," one with boys who cultivated her little holding, one
who kept going with the assistance of a hired lad, while the third lived
upon her cow, which the neighbours helped her to take care of. The chief
house of the community, and the only one which bore something of a
comfortable aspect, was that of Duncan Fraser, who had the largest
allotment of land, and who, though he had fallen back so far with his
rent as to put himself in the power of the law, was one of the class
which as peasant proprietors are thought to be the strength of France.
If the land had been his own he would have found existence very possible
under the hard and stern conditions which were natural to him, and
probably would have brought up for the Church, Robbie his eldest boy,
who had got all the parish school could give him, and was still
dreaming, as he cut the peats or hoed the potatoes, of Glasgow College
and the world. Of the other two houses, one was occupied by an old pair
whose children were out in the world, and who managed, by the
contributions of distant sons and daughters, to pay their rent. The
last was in the possession of a "weirdless" wight, who loved whisky
better than home or holding, and whose wife and children toiled through
as best they could the labour of their few fields.

There were about twenty children in the six houses, all ruddy,
weatherbeaten, flaxen-haired, the girls tied up about their shoulders in
little tartan shawls, and very bare about their legs; the boys in every
kind of quaint garments, little bags of trousers, cobbled out of bigger
garments by workwomen more frugal than artistic. The rent had failed,
for how was money to be had on these levels? but the porridge had never
altogether failed. A few little ones were playing "about the doors" in a
happy superiority to all prejudices on the subject of mud and puddles.
One woman was washing her clothes at her open door. Old Jenny, whom Oona
had come to see, was out upon her doorstep, gazing down the glen to
watch the footsteps of her precious "coo," which a lass of ten with
streaming hair was leading out to get a mouthful of wet grass. Jenny's
mind was always in a flutter lest something should happen to the cow.

"Ye would pass her by upon the road, Miss Oona," the old woman said,
"and how would ye think she was looking? To get meat to her, it's just
a' my thought; but I canna think she will be none the worse for a bit
mouthfu' on the hill."

"But, Jenny, have you nothing to think of but the cow? It will not be
true then, that the time of grace is over, and that the sheriff's
officers are coming to turn you all out?"

"The sheriff's officers!" cried Jenny. She took the edge of her apron in
her hand and drew the hem slowly through her fingers, which was a sign
of perplexity: but yet she was quite composed. "Na, na, Miss Oona,
they'll never turn us out. What wad I be thinking about but the coo?
She's my breadwinner and a' my family. Hoots no, they'll never turn us
out."

"But Mr. Shaw was in great trouble yesterday. He said this was the last
day----"

"I never fash'd my thoom about it," said Jenny. "The last day! It's
maybe the last, or the first, I would never be taking no notice. For the
factor, he's our great friend, and he would not be letting them do it.
No, no; it would but be his jokes," the old woman said.

Was it his jokes? This was the second time the idea had been presented
to her; but Oona remembered the factor's serious face.

"You all seem very quiet here," she said; "not as if any trouble was
coming. But has there not been trouble, Jenny, about your rent or
something?"

"Muckle trouble," said Jenny; "they were to have taken the coo. What
would have become of me if they had ta'en the coo? Duncan, they have
ta'en his, puir lad. To see it go down the brae was enough to break your
heart. But John Shaw he's a kind man; he would not be letting them
meddle with us. He just said 'It's a lone woman; my lord can do without
it better than the old wife can do without it,' he said. He's a kind
man, and so my bonnie beast was saved. I was wae for Duncan; but still,
Miss Oona, things is no desperate so lang as you keep safe your ain
coo."

"That is true," said Oona with a little laugh. There must, she thought,
be some mistake, or else Mr. Shaw had found Lord Erradeen, and without
the help of any influence had moved him to pity the cotters. Under this
consolation she got out her tea and sugar, and other trifles which had
been put into the basket. It was a basket that was well known in the
neighbourhood, and had conveyed many a little dainty in time of need.
Jenny was grateful for the little packets of tea and sugar which she
took more or less as a right, but looked with a curious eye at the
"ginger cordial" for which Mrs. Forrester was famous. It was not a
wicked thing like whisky, no, no: but it warmed ye on a cold day. Jenny
would not have objected to a drop. While she eyed it there became
audible far off voices down the glen, and sounds as of several people
approaching, sounds very unusual in this remote corner of the world.
Jenny forgot the ginger cordial and Oona ran to the door to see what it
was, and the woman who had been washing paused in her work, and old
Nancy Robertson, she whose rent was paid, and who had no need to fear
any sheriff's officers, came out to her door. Even the children stopped
in their game.

The voices were still far off, down upon the road, upon which there was
a group of men, scarcely distinguishable at this distance. Simon
Fraser's wife, she who had been washing, called out that it was Duncan
talking to the factor; but who were those other men? A sense of
approaching trouble came upon the women. Nelly Fraser wiped the soapsuds
from her arms, and wrung her hands still fresh from her tub. She was
always prepared for evil, as is natural to a woman with a "weirdless"
husband. Old Jenny, for her part, thought at once of the coo. She flew,
as well as her old legs would carry her, to the nearest knoll, and
shrieked to the fair-haired little lass who was slowly following that
cherished animal to bring Brockie back. "Bring her back, ye silly thing.
Will ye no be seeing--but I mauna say that," she added in an undertone.
"Bring back the coo! Bring her back! Jessie, my lamb, bring back the
coo." What with old Jenny shrieking, and the voices in the distance, and
something magnetic and charged with disorder in the air, people began to
appear from all the houses. One of the widow's sons, a red and hairy
lad, came running in, in his heavy boots, from the field where he was
working. Duncan Fraser's daughter set down a basket of peat which she
was carrying in, and called her mother to the door. "There's my father
with the factor and twa-three strange men," said the girl, "and oh, what
will they be wanting here?" Thus the women and children looked on with
growing terror, helpless before the approach of fate, as they might have
done two centuries before, when the invaders were rapine and murder,
instead of calm authority and law.

When Oona made her appearance half an hour before everything had been
unquestioning tranquillity and peace. Now, without a word said, all was
alarm. The poor people did not know what was going to happen, but they
felt that something was going to happen. They had been living on a
volcano, easily, quietly, without thinking much of it. But now the fire
was about to blaze forth. Through the minds of those that were mothers
there ran a calculation as swift as light. "What will we do with the
bairns? what will we do with Granny? and the bits of plenishing?" they
said to each other. The younger ones were half pleased with the
excitement, not knowing what it was. Meantime Duncan and Mr. Shaw came
together up the road, the poor man arguing with great animation and
earnestness, the factor listening with a troubled countenance and
sometimes shaking his head. Behind them followed the servants of the
law, those uncomfortable officials to whom the odium of their occupation
clings, though it is no fault of theirs.

"No, Mr. Shaw, we canna pay. You know that as well as I do; but oh, sir,
give us a little time. Would you turn the weans out on the hill and the
auld folk? What would I care if it was just to me? But think upon the
wake creatures--my auld mother that is eighty, and the bairns. If my
lord will not let us off there's some of the other gentry that are kind
and will lend us a helping hand. Oh, give us time! My lord that is
young and so well off, he canna surely understand. What is it to him?
and to us it's life and death."

"Duncan, my man," said the factor, "you are just breaking my heart. I
know all that as well as you; but what can I do? It is the last day, and
we have to act or we just make fools of ourselves. My lord might have
stopped it, but he has not seen fit. For God's sake say no more for I
cannot do it. Ye just break my heart!"

By this time the women were within hearing, and stood listening with
wistful faces, turning from one to another. When he paused they struck
in together, moving towards him eagerly.

"Oh, Mr. Shaw, you've always been our friend," cried Duncan's wife; "you
canna mean that you've come to turn us out to the hill, with all the
little ones and granny?"

"Oh, sir!" cried the other, "have pity upon me that has nae prop nor
help but just a weirdless man."

"Me, I have nae man ava, but just thae hands to travail for my bairns,"
said a third.

And then there came a shriller tone of indignation. "The young lord,
he'll just get a curse--he'll get no blessing."

The factor made a deprecating gesture with his hands "I can do nothing,
I can do nothing," he said. "Take your bairns down the glen to my
housekeeper Marg'ret; take them down to the town, the rest of ye--they
shall not want. Whatever I can do, I'll do. But for God's sake do not
stop us with your wailin', for it has to be done; it is no fault of
mine."

This appeal touched one of the sufferers at least with a movement of
fierce irony. Duncan uttered a short, sharp laugh, which rung strangely
into the air, so full of passion. "Haud your tongues, women," he cried,
"and no vex Mr. Shaw; you're hurting his feelings," with a tone
impossible to describe, in which wrath and misery and keen indignation
and ridicule contended for the mastery. He was the only man in the
desolate group. He drew a few steps apart and folded his arms upon his
breast, retiring in that pride of despair which a cotter ruined may
experience no less than a king vanquished, from further struggle or
complaint. The women neither understood nor noted the finer meaning in
his words. They had but one thought, the misery before them. They
crowded round the factor, all speaking in one breath, grasping his arm
to call his attention--almost mobbing him with distracted appeals, with
the wild natural eloquence of their waving hands and straining eyes.

Meanwhile there were other elements, some comic enough, in the curious
circle round. Old Nancy Robertson had not left the doorstep where she
stood keenly watching in the composure and superiority of one whom
nobody could touch, who had paid her rent, and was above the world. It
was scarcely possible not to be a little complacent in the superiority
of her circumstances, or to refrain from criticising the unseemly
excitement of the others. She had her spectacles on her nose, and her
head projected, and she thought they were all like play-actors with
their gesticulations and cries. "I wouldna be skreighin' like that--no
me," she said. Round about the fringe of children gaped and gazed, some
stolid with amaze, some pale in a vague sympathetic misery, none of them
quite without a certain enjoyment of this extraordinary episode and
stimulation of excitement. And old Jenny, awakened to no alarm about her
cottage, still stood upon her knoll, with her whole soul intent upon the
fortunes of Brockie, who had met the sheriff's officers in full career.
The attempts of her little guardian to turn the cow back from her whiff
of pasture had only succeeded in calling the special attention of these
invaders. They stopped short, and one of them taking a piece of rope
from his pocket secured it round the neck of the frightened animal, who
stood something like a woman in a similar case, looking to left and to
right, not knowing in her confusion which way to bolt, though the
intention was evident in her terrified eyes. At this Jenny gave a shriek
of mingled rage and terror, which in its superior force and concentrated
passion rang through all the other sounds, silencing for the moment even
the wailing of the women--and flung herself into the midst of the
struggle. She was a dry, little, withered old woman, nimble and light,
and ran like a hare or rabbit down the rough road without a pause or
stumble.

"My coo!" cried Jenny, "ye sallna tak' her; ye sall tak' my heart's
blood first. My coo! Miss Oona, Miss Oona, will you just be standing by,
like nothing at all, and letting them tak' my coo? G'way, ye robbers,"
Jenny shrieked, flinging one arm about the neck of the alarmed brute,
while she pushed away its captor with the other. Her arm was still
vigorous, though she was old. The man stumbled and lost his hold of the
rope; the cow, liberated, tossed head and tail into the air and flung
off to the hill-side like a deer. The shock threw Jenny down and stunned
her. This made a little diversion in the dismal scene above.

And now it became evident that whatever was to be done must be done,
expression being exhausted on the part of the victims, who stood about
in a blank of overwrought feeling awaiting the next move. The factor
made a sign with his hand, and sat down upon a ledge of rock opposite
the cottages, his shaggy eyebrows curved over his eyes, his hat drawn
down upon his brows. A sort of silent shock ran through the beholders
when the men entered the first cottage: and when they came out again
carrying a piece of furniture, there was a cry, half savage in its wild
impotence. Unfortunately the first thing that came to their hands was a
large wooden cradle, in which lay a baby tucked up under the big
patchwork quilt, which bulged out on every side. As it was set down upon
its large rockers on the uneven ground the little sleeper gave a
startled wail; and then it was that that cry, sharp and keen, dividing
the silence like a knife, burst from the breasts of the watching people.
It was Nelly Fraser's baby, who had the "weirdless" man. She stood with
her bare arms wrapped in her apron beside her abandoned washing-tub, and
gazed as if incapable of movement, with a face like ashes, at the
destruction of her home. But while the mother stood stupefied, a little
thing of three or four, which had been clinging to her skirts in keen
baby wonder and attention, when she saw the cradle carried forth into
the open air immediately took the place of guardian. Such an incident
had never happened in all little Jeanie's experience before. She trotted
forth, abandoning all alarm, to the road in which it was set down, and,
turning a little smiling face of perfect content to the world, began to
rock it softly with little coos of soothing and rills of infant
laughter. The sombre background round, with all its human misery, made a
dismal foil to this image of innocent satisfaction. The factor jumped up
and turned his back upon the scene altogether, biting his nails and
lowering his brows in a fury of wretchedness. And at last the poor women
began to stir and take whispered counsel with each other. There was no
longer room for either hope or entreaty; the only thing to be thought of
now was what to do.

The next cottage was that of Nancy Robertson, who still held her
position on her doorstep, watching the proceedings with a keen but
somewhat complacent curiosity. They gave her an intense sense of
self-importance and superiority, though she was not without feeling.
When, however, the men, who had warmed to their work, and knew no
distinction between one and another, approached her, a sudden panic and
fury seized the old woman. She defied them shrilly, flying at the throat
of the foremost with her old hands. The wretchedness of the poor women
whose children were being thrust out shelterless did not reach the wild
height of passion of her whose lawful property was threatened.

"Villains!" she shrieked, "will ye break into my hoose? What right have
ye in my hoose? I'll brack your banes afore you put a fit into my
hoose."

"Whist, whist, wife," said one of the men; "let go now, or I'll have to
hurt ye. You canna stop us. You'll just do harm to yourself."

"John Shaw, John Shaw," shrieked Nancy, "do ye see what they're doing?
and me that has paid my rent, no like those weirdless fuils. Do ye hear
me speak? I've paid my rent to the last farden. I've discharged a' my
debts, as I wuss ithers would discharge their debts to me." Her voice
calmed down as the factor turned and made an impatient sign to the men.
"Ye see," said Nancy, making a little address to her community, "what it
is to have right on your side. They canna meddle with me. My man's auld,
and I have everything to do for mysel', but they canna lay a hand on
me.

"Oh, hold your tongue, woman," cried Duncan Fraser. "If ye canna help
us, ye can let us be."

"And wha says that I canna help ye? I am just saying--I pay my debts as
I wuss that ithers should pay their debts to me: and that's Scripter,"
said Nancy; but she added, "I never said I would shut my door to a
neebor: ye can bring in Granny here; I'm no just a heart of stane like
that young lord."

The women had not waited to witness Nancy's difficulties. Most of them
had gone into their houses, to take a shawl from a cupboard, a book from
the "drawers-head." One or two appeared with the family Bible under
their arm. "The Lord kens where we are to go, but we must go somewhere,"
they said. There was a little group about Oona and her two pound notes.
The moment of excitement was over, and they had now nothing to do but to
meet their fate. The factor paced back and forward on the path, going
out of his way to avoid here and there a pile of poor furniture. And the
work of devastation went on rapidly: it is so easy, alas, to dismantle a
cottage with its but and ben. Duncan Fraser did not move till two or
three had been emptied. When he went in to bring out his mother, there
was a renewed sensation among the worn-out people who were scarcely
capable of any further excitement. Granny was Granny to all the glen.
She was the only survivor of her generation. They had all known her from
their earliest days. They stood worn and sorrow-stricken, huddled
together in a little crowd, waiting before they took any further steps,
till Granny should come.

But it was not Granny who came first. Some one, a stranger even to the
children, whose attention was so easily attracted by any novelty,
appeared suddenly round a corner of the hill. He paused at the
unexpected sight of the little cluster of habitations; for the country
was unknown to him; and for a moment appeared as if he would have turned
back. But the human excitement about this scene caught him in spite of
himself. He gazed at it for a moment trying to divine what was
happening, then came on slowly with hesitating steps. He had been out
all the morning, as he had been for some days before. His being had
sustained a great moral shock, and for the moment all his holds on life
seemed gone. This was the first thing that had moved him even to the
faintest curiosity. He came forward slowly, observed by no one. The
factor was still standing with his back to the woeful scene, gloomily
contemplating the distant country, while Oona moved about in the midst
of the women, joining in their consultations, and doing her best to
rouse poor Nelly, who sat by her baby's cradle like a creature dazed and
capable of no further thought. There was, therefore, no one to recognise
Lord Erradeen as he came slowly into the midst of this tragedy, not
knowing what it was. The officials had recovered their spirits as they
got on with their work. Natural pity and sympathetic feeling had yielded
to the carelessness of habit and common occupation. They had begun to
make rough jokes with each other, to fling the cotters' possessions
carelessly out of the windows, to give each other catches with a "Hi!
tak' this," flinging the things about. Lord Erradeen had crossed the
little bridge, and was in the midst of the action of the painful drama,
when they brought out from Duncan's house his old mother's chair. It was
cushioned with pillows, one of which tumbled out into the mud and was
roughly caught up by the rough fellow who carried it, and flung at his
companion's head, with a laugh and jest. It was he who first caught
sight of the stranger, a new figure among the disconsolate crowd. He
gave a whistle to his comrade to announce a novelty, and rattled down
hastily out of his hands the heavy chair. Walter was wholly roused by
the strangeness of this pantomime. It brought back something to his
mind, though he could scarcely tell what. He stepped in front of the man
and asked, "What does this mean?" in a hasty and somewhat imperious
tone; but his eyes answered his question almost before he had asked it.
Nelly Fraser with her pile of furniture, her helpless group of children,
her stupefied air of misery, was full in the foreground, and the ground
was strewed with other piles. Half of the houses in the hamlet were
already gutted. One poor woman was lifting her bedding out of the wet,
putting it up upon chairs; another stood regarding hers helplessly, as
if without energy to attempt even so small a salvage.

"What is the meaning of all this?" the young man cried imperiously
again.

His voice woke something in the deep air of despondency and misery which
had not been there before. It caught the ear of Oona, who pushed the
women aside in sudden excitement. It roused--was it a faint thrill of
hope in the general despair? Last of all it reached the factor, who,
standing gloomily apart, had closed himself up in angry wretchedness
against any appeal. He did not hear this, but somehow felt it in the
air, and turned round, not knowing what the new thing was. When he saw
Lord Erradeen, Shaw was seized as with a sudden frenzy. He turned round
upon him sharply, with an air which was almost threatening.

"What does it mean?" he said. "It means your will and pleasure, Lord
Erradeen, not mine. God is my witness, no will of mine. You brute!"
cried the factor, suddenly, "what are you doing? Stand out of the way,
and let the honest woman pass. Get out of her way, I tell you, or I'll
send ye head foremost down the glen!"

This sudden outcry, which was a relief to the factor's feelings, was
addressed not to Walter, but to the man who, coming out again with a new
armful, came rudely in the way of the old Granny, to whom all the glen
looked up, and who was coming out with a look of bewilderment on her
aged face, holding by her son's arm. Granny comprehended vaguely, if at
all, what was going on. She gave a momentary glance of suspicion at the
fellow who pushed against her, then looked out with a faint smile at the
two gentlemen standing in front of the door. Her startled mind recurred
to its old instincts with but a faint perception of anything new.

"Sirs," she said, in her feeble old voice, "I am distressed I canna ask
ye in; but I'm feckless mysel, being a great age, and there's some
flitting going on, and my good-daughter she is out of the way."

"Do you hear that, my lord?" cried Shaw; "the old wife is making her
excuses for not asking you into a house you are turning her out of at
the age of eighty-three. Oh, I am not minding if I give ye offence! I
have had enough of it. Find another factor, Lord Erradeen. I would
rather gather stones upon the fields than do again what I have done this
day."

Walter looked about like a man awakened from a dream. He said, almost
with awe--

"Is this supposed to be done by me? I know nothing of it, nor the
reason. What is the reason? I disown it altogether as any act of mine."

"Oh, my lord," cried Shaw, who was in a state of wild excitement, "there
is the best of reasons. Rent--your lordship understands that--a little
more money lest your coffers should not be full enough. And as for these
poor bodies, they have so much to put up with, a little more does not
matter. They have not a roof to their heads, but that's nothing to your
lordship. You can cover the hills with sheep, and they can--die--if
they like," cried the factor, avenging himself for all he had suffered.
He turned away with a gesture of despair and fury. "I have done enough;
I wash my hands of it," he cried.

Walter cast around him a bewildered look. To his own consciousness he
was a miserable and helpless man; but all the poor people about gazed at
him, wistful, deprecating, as at a sort of unknown, unfriendly god, who
had their lives in his hands. The officers perhaps thought it a good
moment to show their zeal in the eyes of the young lord. They made a
plunge into the house once more, and appeared again, one carrying
Duncan's bed, a great, slippery, unwieldy sack of chaff, another charged
with the old, tall, eight-day clock, which he jerked along as if it had
been a man hopping from one foot to another.

"We'll soon be done, my lord," the first said in an encouraging tone,
"and then a' the commotion will just die away."

Lord Erradeen had been lost in a miserable dream. He woke up now at this
keen touch of reality, and found himself in a position so abhorrent and
antagonistic to all his former instincts and traditions, that his very
being seemed to stand still in the horror of the moment. Then a sudden
passionate energy filled all his veins. The voice in which he ordered
the men back rang through the glen. He had flung himself upon one of
them in half-frantic rage, before he was aware what he was doing,
knocking down the astounded official, who got up rubbing his elbow, and
declaring it was no fault of his; while Walter glared at him, not
knowing what he did. But after this encounter with flesh and blood Lord
Erradeen recovered his reason. He turned round quickly, and with his own
hands carried back Granny's chair. The very weight of it, the touch of
something to do, brought life into his veins. He took the old woman from
her son's arm, and led her in reverently, supporting her upon his own:
then going out again without a word, addressed himself to the manual
work of restoration. From the moment of his first movement, the whole
scene changed in the twinkling of an eye. The despairing apathy of the
people gave way to a tumult of haste and activity. Duncan Fraser was the
first to move.

"My lord!" he cried; "if you are my lord," his stern composure yielding
to tremulous excitement, "if it's your good will and pleasure to let us
bide, that's all we want. Take no trouble for us; take no thought for
that." Walter gave him a look, almost without intelligence. He had not a
word to say. He was not sufficiently master of himself to express the
sorrow and anger and humiliation in his awakened soul; but he could
carry back the poor people's things, which was a language of nature not
to be misunderstood. He went on taking no heed of the eager assistance
offered on all sides. "I'll do it, my lord. Oh, dinna you trouble. It's
ower much kindness. Ye'll fyle your fingers; ye'll wear out your
strength. We'll do it; we'll do it," the people cried.

The cottagers' doors flew open as by magic; they worked all together,
the women, the children, and Duncan Fraser, and Lord Erradeen. Even Oona
joined, carrying the little children back to their homes, picking up
here a bird in a cage, there a little stunted geranium or musk in a pot.
In half an hour it seemed, or less, the whole was done, and when the
clouds that had been lowering on the hills and darkening the atmosphere
broke and began to pour down torrents of rain upon the glen, the little
community was housed and comfortable once more.

While this excitement lasted Walter was once more the healthful and
vigorous young man who had travelled with Oona on the coach, and laughed
with her on the Isle. But when the storm was over, and they walked
together towards the loch, she became aware of the difference in him. He
was very serious, pale, almost haggard now that the excitement was over.
His smiling lips smiled no longer, there was in his eyes, once so
light-hearted and careless, a sort of hunted, anxious look.

"No," he said, in answer to her questions, "I have not been ill; I have
had--family matters to occupy me: and of this I knew nothing. Letters? I
had none, I received nothing. I have been occupied, too much perhaps,
with--family affairs."

Upon this no comment could be made, but his changed looks made so great
a claim upon her sympathy that Oona looked at him with eyes that were
almost tender in their pity. He turned round suddenly and met her
glance.

"You know," he said, with a slight tremble in his voice, "that there are
some things--they say in every family--a little hard to bear. But I have
been too much absorbed--I was taken by surprise. It shall happen no
more." He held his head high, and looked round him as if to let some one
else see the assurance he was giving her. "I promise you," he added, in
a tone that rang like a defiance, "it shall happen no more!" Then he
added hurriedly with a slight swerve aside, and trembling in his voice,
"Do you think I might come with you? Would Mrs. Forrester have me at the
Isle?"


END OF VOL. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Note: Hyphen variations left as printed.]


[The end of _The Wizard's Son, Volume 1_ by Margaret Oliphant]






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIZARD'S SON, VOL. 1 (OF 3) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Wizard's Son, Vol. 3 (of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Wizard's Son, Vol. 3 (of 3)


Author: Mrs. Oliphant

Release date: December 6, 2014 [eBook #47557]
                Most recently updated: March 12, 2015

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan & the online
        Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
        http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
        images generously made available by The Internet
        Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIZARD'S SON, VOL. 3 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Mary Meehan & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









                     THE WIZARD'S SON

                         A Novel

                     BY MRS. OLIPHANT

    AUTHOR OF "THE CURATE IN CHARGE," "YOUNG MUSGRAVE," ETC.


    IN THREE VOLUMES
    VOL. III.

    London
    MACMILLAN AND CO.
    1884

    [_The Right of Translation and Reproduction is Reserved_]

    LONDON:
    R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS,
    BREAD STREET HILL.




THE WIZARD'S SON.




CHAPTER I.


Was this then the conclusion of all things--that there was nothing so
perfect that it was worth a man's while to struggle for it; that any
officious interference with the recognised and existing was a mistake;
that nothing was either the best or the worst, but all things mere
degrees in a round of the comparative, in which a little more or a
little less was of no importance, and the most strenuous efforts tended
to failure as much as indifference? Walter, returning to the old house
which was his field of battle, questioned himself thus, with a sense of
despair not lessened by the deeper self-ridicule within him, which
asked, was he then so anxious for the best, so ready to sacrifice his
comfort for an ideal excellence? That he, of all men, should have this
to do, and yet that, being done, it should be altogether ineffectual,
was a sort of climax of clumsy mortal failure and hopelessness. The
only good thing he had done was the restoration of those half-evicted
cotters, and that was but a mingled and uncertain good, it appeared.
What was the use of any struggle? If it was his own personal freedom
alone that he really wanted, why here it was within his power to
purchase it--or at least a moderate amount of it--a comparative freedom,
as everything was comparative. His mind by this time had ceased to be
able to think, or even to perceive with any distinctness the phrase or
_motif_ inscribed upon one of those confused and idly-turning wheels of
mental machinery which had stood in the place of thought to him. It was
the afternoon when he got back, and everything within him had fallen
into an afternoon dreariness. He lingered when he landed on the waste
bit of grass that lay between the little landing-place and the door of
the old castle. He had no heart to go in and sit down unoccupied in that
room which had witnessed so many strange meetings. He was no longer
indeed afraid of his visitor there, but rather looked forward with a
kind of relief to the tangible presence which delivered him from
meetings of the mind more subtle and painful. But he had no expectation
of any visitor; nor was there anything for him to do except to sit down
and perhaps attempt to read, which meant solely a delivering over of
himself to his spiritual antagonists--for how was it possible to give
his mind to any fable of literature in the midst of a parable so urgent
and all-occupying, of his own?

He stood therefore idly upon the neglected turf, watching the ripple of
the water as it lapped against the rough stones on the edge. The breadth
of the loch was entirely hidden from him by the projection of the old
tower, which descended into the water at the right, and almost shut off
this highest corner of Loch Houran into a little lakelet of its own.
Walter heard the sound of oars and voices from the loch without seeing
any one: but that was usual enough, and few people invaded his privacy:
so that he was taken by surprise when, suddenly raising his eyes, he was
aware of the polished and gilded galley from Birkenbraes, in which
already Mr. Williamson, seated in the stern, had perceived and was
hailing him. "Hallo, my Lord Erradeen! Here we've all come to see ye
this fine afternoon. I told them we should find ye under your own vine
and your own fig-tree." This speech was accompanied by a general laugh.
The arrival of such a party, heralded by such laughter in a desolate
house, with few servants and no readiness for any such emergency, to a
young man in Walter's confused and distracted condition would not, it
may be supposed, have been very welcome in any case, and at present in
his exhaustion and dismay he stood and gazed at them with a sort of
horror. There was not even a ready servitor like Hamish to assist in the
disembarkation. Duncan had rowed cheerfully off upon some other errand
after landing his master, and old Symington and old Macalister were
singularly ill-adapted for the service. Lord Erradeen did his best,
with a somewhat bad grace, to receive the boat at the landing-place. The
gravity of his countenance was a little chill upon the merry party, but
the Williamsons were not of a kind that is easily discouraged.

"Oh, yes, here we all are," said the millionnaire. "I would not let our
English visitor, Mr. Braithwaite here, leave without showing him the
finest thing on the loch. So I just told him I knew I might take the
liberty. Hoot! we know ye have not your household here, and that it is
just an old family ruin, and not bound to produce tea and scones like
the Forresters' isle. Bless me! I hope we have a soul above tea and
scones," Mr. Williamson cried with his hearty laugh.

By this time the young, hardy, half-clad rowers had scrambled out, and
grouped themselves in various attitudes, such as would suit a new and
light-hearted Michael Angelo--one kneeling on the stones holding the bow
of the boat, another with one foot on sea and one on shore helping the
ladies out. Walter in his dark dress, and still darker preoccupied
countenance, among all those bronzed and cheerful youths looked like a
being from another sphere: but the contrast was not much to his
advantage either in bodily or mental atmosphere. He looked so grave and
so unlike the joyous hospitality of a young housekeeper surprised by a
sudden arrival, that Katie, always more on her guard than her father,
looked at him with a countenance as grave as his own.

"I am not the leader of this expedition, Lord Erradeen," she said; "you
must not blame me for the invasion. My father took it into his head, and
when that happens there is nothing to be done. I don't mean I was not
glad to be brought here against my will," she added, as his face, by a
strain of politeness which was far from easy to him, began to brighten a
little. Katie was not apt to follow the leading of another face and
adopt the woman's _rôle_ of submission, but she felt herself so
completely in the wrong, an intruder where she was very sure she and her
party, exuberant in spirits and gaiety, were not wanted, that she was
compelled to watch his expression and make her apologies with a
deference quite unusual to her. "I hope it will not be a very
great--interruption to you," she said after a momentary pause.

"That could never matter," Walter said, with some stateliness. "I could
have wished to have notice and to have received my friends at
Auchnasheen rather than here. But being here--you must excuse the
primitive conditions of the place."

"Hoot! there is nothing to excuse--a fine old castle, older than the
flood--just the very thing that is wanted for the picturesque, ye see,
Braithwaite; for as ye were remarking, we are in general too modern for
a Highland loch. But you'll not call this modern," said Mr. Williamson.
"Will that old body not open the door to ye when he sees ye have
friends? Lord! that just beats all! That is a step beyond Caleb
Balderstone."

"Papa!" cried Katie in keen reproof, "we have been quite importunate
enough already. I vote we all go over to Auchnasheen--the view there is
much finer, and we could send over for Oona----"

"Is it common in this country," said the member of Parliament, "to have
two residences so very near? It must be like going next door for change
of air when you leave one for the other, Lord Erradeen."

At this there was that slight stir among the party which takes place
when an awkward suggestion is made; the young men and the girls began to
talk hurriedly, raising up a sort of atmosphere of voices around the
central group. This however was curiously and suddenly penetrated by the
reply which--who?--was it Walter? made, almost as it seemed without a
pause.

"Not common--but yet not unknown in a country which has known a great
deal of fighting in its day. The old castle is our family resource in
danger. We do our family business here, our quarrels: and afterwards
retire to Auchnasheen, the house of peace (perhaps you don't know that
names have meanings hereabouts?) to rest."

There was a pause as slight, as imperceptible to the ignorant, as
evident to the instructed as had been the stir at the first sound of
those clear tones. Walter himself to more than one observer had seemed
as much startled as any of them. He turned quickly round towards the
speaker with a sudden blanching of his face which had been pale enough
before; but this was only momentary; afterwards all that was remarkable
in him was a strange look of resolution and determined self-control.
Perhaps the only one completely unmoved was the Englishman, who at once
accepted the challenge, and stepped forward to the individual who it was
evident to him was the only duly qualified cicerone in the party, with
eager satisfaction.

"That is highly interesting. Of course the place must be full of
traditions," he said.

"With your permission, Walter, I will take the part of cicerone," said
the new voice. To some of the party it seemed only a voice. The ladies
and the young men stumbled against each other in their eager curiosity
about the stranger. "I will swear there was nobody near Erradeen when we
landed," said young Tom Campbell in the nearest ear that presented
itself; but of course it was the number of people about which caused
this, and it could be no shadow with whom the M.P. went forth delighted,
asking a hundred questions. "You are a member of the family?" Mr.
Braithwaite said. He was not tall, and his companion was of a splendid
presence. The Englishman had to look up as he spoke and to quicken his
somewhat short steps as he walked to keep up with the other's large and
dignified pace. Katie followed with Walter. There was a look of
agitation and alarm in her face; her heart beat she could not tell why.
She was breathless as if she had been running a race. She looked up into
Lord Erradeen's face tremulously, not like herself. "Is this
gentleman--staying with you?" she said in a scarcely audible voice.

Walter was not agitated for his part, but he had little inclination to
speak. He said "Yes" and no more.

"And we have been--sorry for you because you were alone? Is it
a--relation? is it--? You have never," said Katie, forcing the words out
with a difficulty which astonished her, and for which she could not
account, "brought him to Birkenbraes."

Walter could not but smile. A sort of feeble amusement flew over his
mind touching the surface into a kind of ripple. "Shall I ask him to
come?" he said.

Katie was following in the very footsteps of this altogether new and
unexpected figure. There was nothing like him, it seemed to her, in all
the country-side. His voice dominated every other sound, not loud, but
clear. It subdued her little being altogether. She would not lose a
word, yet her breath was taken away by an inexplicable terror.

"He is--like somebody," she said, panting, "out of a book," and could
say no more.

Old Macalister came towards them from the now open door, at which stood
Symington in attendance. The servants had been disturbed by the unusual
sounds of the arrival. Macalister's old face was drawn and haggard.

"Where will ye be taking all thae folk?" he said, no doubt forgetting
his manners in his bewilderment.

"Come back, ye'll get into mischief that road," he cried, putting out
his hand to catch the arm of Braithwaite, who, guided by the stranger,
was passing the ordinary entrance. He became quite nervous and angry
when no heed was paid to him. "My lord, you're no so well acquaint
yourself. Will you let that lad just wander and break his neck?" he
cried, with a kind of passion.

"Never mind," said Walter, with a strange calm which was as
unaccountable as all the rest. "Will you tell your wife to prepare for
these ladies--when we come back."

Here Symington too came forth to explain somewhat loudly, addressing his
master and Braithwaite alternately, that the roads were not safe about
the old castle, that the walls were crumbling, that a person not
acquaint might get a deadly fall, with unspeakable anxiety in his eyes.
The party all followed, notwithstanding, led by the stranger, whom even
the least of them now thought she could distinguish over Katie's head,
but of whom the servants took no notice, addressing the others in front
as if he had not been there.

"My lord, ye'll repent if ye'll no listen to us," Symington said, laying
his hand in sudden desperation on Walter's arm.

"You fool!" cried the young man, "can't you see we have got a safe
guide?"

Symington gave a look round him wildly of the utmost terror. His scared
eyes seemed to retreat into deep caverns of anguish and fear. He stood
back out of the way of the somewhat excited party, who laughed, and yet
scarcely could laugh with comfort, at him. The youngsters had begun to
chatter: they were not afraid of anything--Still--: though it was
certainly amusing to see that old man's face.

Turning round to exchange a look with Macalister, Symington came in
contact with Mr. Williamson's solid and cheerful bulk, who brought up
the rear. "I'm saying," said the millionnaire confidentially, "who's
this fine fellow your master's got with him? A grand figure of a man!
It's not often you see it, but I always admire it. A relation, too; what
relation? I would say it must be on the mother's side, for I've never
seen or heard tell of him. Eh? who's staying with your master, I'm
asking ye? Are ye deaf or doited that ye cannot answer a simple
question?"

"Na, there is nothing the matter with me; but I think the rest of the
world has just taken leave of their senses," Symington said.




CHAPTER II.


Julia Herbert had failed altogether in her object during that end of the
season which her relations had afforded her. Walter had not even come to
call. He had sent a hurried note excusing himself, and explaining that
he was "obliged to leave town," an excuse by which nobody was deceived.
It is not by any easy process that a girl, who begins with all a girl's
natural pride and pretensions, is brought down to recognise the fact
that a man is avoiding and fleeing from her, and yet to follow and seek
him. Hard poverty, and the memories of a life spent in the tiny cottage
with her mother, without any enlargement or wider atmosphere, and with
but one way of escape in which there was hope or even possibility, had
brought Julia to this pass. She had nothing in her life that was worth
doing except to scheme how she could dress and present the best
appearance, and how she could get hold of and secure that only
stepping-stone by which she could mount out of it--a man who would marry
her and open to her the doors of something better. In every other way it
is worth the best exertions of either man or woman to get these doors
opened, and to come to the possibility of better things; and a poor girl
who has been trained to nothing more exalted, who sees no other way,
notwithstanding that this poor way of hers revolts every finer spirit,
is there not something pitiful and tragic in her struggles, her sad and
degrading attempt after a new beginning? How much human force is wasted
upon it, what heart-sickness, what self-contempt is undergone, what a
debasement of all that is best and finest in her? She has no pity, no
sympathy in her pursuit, but ridicule, contempt, the derision of one
half of humanity, the indignation of the other. And yet her object after
all may not be entirely despicable. She may feel with despair that there
is no other way. She may intend to be all that is good and noble were
but this one step made, this barrier crossed, the means of a larger life
attained. It would be better for her no doubt to be a governess, or even
a seamstress, or to put up with the chill meannesses of a
poverty-stricken existence, and starve, modestly keeping up appearances
with her last breath.

But all women are not born self-denying. When they are young, the blood
runs as warmly in their veins as in that of men; they too want life,
movement, sunshine and happiness. The mere daylight, the air, a new
frock, however hardly obtained, a dance, a little admiration, suffice
for them when they are very young; but when the next chapter comes, and
the girl learns to calculate that, saving some great matrimonial
chance, there is no prospect for her but the narrowest and most meagre
and monotonous existence under heaven, the life of a poor, very poor
single woman who cannot dig and to beg is ashamed--is it to be wondered
at if she makes a desperate struggle anyhow (and alas! there is but one
_how_) to escape. Perhaps she likes too, poor creature, the little
excitement of flirtation, the only thing which replaces to her the
manifold excitement which men of her kind indulge in--the tumultuous
joys of the turf, the charms of play, the delights of the club, the
moors, and sport in general, not to speak of all those developments of
pleasure, so-called, which are impossible to a woman. She cannot dabble
a little in vice as a man can do, and yet return again, and be no worse
thought of than before. Both for amusement and profit she has this one
way, which, to be sure, answers the purpose of all the others in being
destructive of the best part in her, spoiling her character, and
injuring her reputation--but for how much less a cause, and with how
little recompense in the way of enjoyment! The husband-hunting girl is
fair game to whosoever has a stone to throw, and very few are so
charitable as to say, Poor soul! Julia Herbert had been as bright a
creature at eighteen as one could wish to see. At twenty-four she was
bright still, full of animation, full of good humour, clever in her way,
very pretty, high-spirited, amusing--and still so young! But how
profoundly had it been impressed upon her that she must not lose her
time! and how well she knew all the opprobrious epithets that are
directed against a young woman as she draws towards thirty--the very
flower and prime of her life. Was she to blame if she was influenced by
all that was said to this effect, and determined to fight with a sort of
mad persistence, for the hope which seemed so well within her reach?
Were she but once established as Lady Erradeen, there was not one of her
youthful sins that would be remembered against her. A veil of light
would fall over her and all her peccadilloes as soon as she had put on
her bridal veil. Her friends, instead of feeling her a burden and
perplexity, would be proud of Julia; they would put forth their
cousinhood eagerly, and claim her--even those who were most anxious now
to demonstrate the extreme distance of the connection--as near and dear.
And she liked Walter, and thought she would have no difficulty in loving
him, had she ever a right to do so. He was not too good for her; she
would have something to forgive in him, if he too in her might have
something to forgive. She would make him a good wife, a wife of whom he
should have no occasion to be ashamed. All these considerations made it
excusable--more than excusable, almost laudable--to strain a point for
so great an end.

And in her cousin's wife she had, so far as this went, a real friend.
Lady Herbert not only felt that to get Julia settled was most desirable,
and that, as Lady Erradeen, she would become a most creditable cousin,
and one who might return the favours showed to her, but also, which is
less general, felt within herself a strong inclination to help and
further Julia's object. She thought favourably of Lord Erradeen. She
thought he would not be difficult to manage (which was a mistake as the
reader knows). She thought he was not so strong as Julia, but once fully
within the power of her fascinations, would fall an easy prey. She did
not think less of him for running away. It was a sign of weakness, if
also of wisdom; and if he could be met in a place from which he could
not run away, it seemed to her that the victory would be easy. And Sir
Thomas must have a moor somewhere to refresh him after the vast labours
of a session in which he had recorded so many silent votes. By dint of
having followed him to many a moor, Lady Herbert had a tolerable
geographical knowledge of the Highlands, and it was not very difficult
for her to find out that Mr. Campbell of Ellermore, with his large
family, would be obliged this year to let his shootings. Every thing was
settled and prepared accordingly to further Julia's views, without any
warning on the point having reached Walter. She had arrived indeed at
the Lodge, which was some miles down the loch, beyond Birkenbraes, a few
days after Walter's arrival, and thus once more, though he was so far
from thinking of it, his old sins, or rather his old follies, were about
to find him out.

Lady Herbert had already become known to various people on the
loch-side. She had been at the Lodge since early in September, and had
been called upon by friendly folk on all sides. There had been a
thousand chances that Walter might have found her at luncheon with all
the others on his first appearance at Birkenbraes, and Julia had already
been introduced to that hospitable house. Katie did not recognise Lady
Herbert either by name or countenance. But she recognised Julia as soon
as she saw her.

"I think you know Lord Erradeen?" was almost her first greeting, for
Katie was a young person of very straight-forward methods.

"Oh yes," Julia had answered with animation, "I have known him all my
life."

"I suppose you know that he lives here?"

Upon this Julia turned to her chaperon, her relation in whose hands all
these external questions were.

"Did you know, dear Lady Herbert, that Lord Erradeen lived here?"

"Oh yes, he has a place close by. Didn't I tell you? A pretty house,
with that old castle near it, which I pointed out to you on the lock,"
Lady Herbert said.

"How small the world is!" cried Julia; "wherever you go you are always
knocking up against somebody. Fancy Walter Methven living here!"

Katie was not taken in by this little play. She was not even irritated
as she had been at Burlington House. If it might so happen that some
youthful bond existed between Lord Erradeen and this girl, Katie was not
the woman to use any unfair means against it.

"You will be sure to meet him," she said calmly. "We hope he is not
going to shut himself up as he did last year."

"Oh tell me!" Julia cried, with overflowing interest, "is there not some
wonderful ghost story? something about his house being haunted; and he
has to go and present himself and have an interview with the ghost?
Captain Underwood, I remember, told us----"

"Did you know Captain Underwood?" said Katie, in that tone which says so
much.

And then she turned to her other guests: for naturally the house was
full of people, and as was habitual in Birkenbraes a large party from
outside had come to lunch. The Williamsons were discussed with much
freedom among the visitors from the Lodge when they went away. Sir
Thomas declared that the old man was a monstrous fine old fellow, and
his claret worth coming from Devonshire to drink.

"No expense spared in that establishment," he cried; "and there's a
little girl, I should say, that would be worth a young fellow's while."

He despised Julia to the bottom of his heart, but he thought of his
young friends on the other side without any such elevated sentiment, and
decided it might not be a bad thing to have Algy Newton down, to whom it
was indispensable that he should marry money. Sir Thomas, however, had
not the energy to carry his intention out.

Next day it so happened that Lady Herbert had to return the visit of
Mrs. Forrester, who--though she always explained her regret at not
being able to entertain her friends--was punctilious in making the
proper calls. The English ladies were "charmed" with the isle. They said
there had never been anything so original, so delightful, so
unconventional; ignoring altogether, with a politeness which Mrs.
Forrester thought was "pretty," any idea that necessity might be the
motive of the mother and daughter in settling there.

"I am sure it is very kind of you to say so; but it is not just a matter
of choice, you know. It is just an old house that came to me from the
Macnabs--my mother's side. And it proved very convenient when all the
boys were away and nothing left but Oona and me. Women want but little
in comparison with gentlemen; and though it is a little out of the way
and inconvenient in the winter season, it is wonderful how few days
there are that we can't get out. I am very well content with the Walk
when there is a glint of sunshine; but Oona, she just never minds the
weather. Oh, you will not be going just yet! Tell Mysie, Oona, to bring
ben the tea. If it is a little early what matter? It always helps to
keep you warm on the loch, and my old cook is rather noted for her
scones. She just begins as soon as she hears there's a boat, and she
will be much disappointed if ye don't taste them. Our friends are all
very kind; we have somebody or other every day."

"It is you who are kind, I think," Lady Herbert said.

"No, no; two ladies--it is nothing we have it in our power to do: but a
cup of tea, it is just a charity to accept it; and as you go down to
your boat I will let you see the view."

Julia, for her part, felt, or professed, a great interest in the girl
living the life of a recluse on this little island.

"It must be delightful," she said with enthusiasm; "but don't you
sometimes feel a little dull? It is the sweetest place I ever saw. But
shouldn't you like to walk on to the land without always requiring a
boat?"

"I don't think I have considered the subject," Oona said; "it is our
home, and we do not think whether or not we should like it to be
different."

"Oh what a delightful state of mind! I don't think I could be so
contented anywhere--so happy in myself. I think," said Julia with an
ingratiating look, "that you must be very happy in yourself."

Oona laughed. "As much and as little as other people," she said.

"Oh not as little! I should picture to myself a hundred things I wanted
as soon as I found myself shut up here. I should want to be in town. I
should want to go shopping. I should wish for--everything I had not got.
Don't you immediately think of dozens of things you want as soon as you
know you can't get them? But you are so good?"

"If that is being good! No, I think I rather refrain from wishing for
what I should like when I see I am not likely to get it."

"I call that goodness itself--but perhaps it is Scotch. I have the
greatest respect for the Scotch," said Julia. "They are so sensible."
Then she laughed, as at some private joke of her own, and said under her
breath, "Not all, however," and looked towards Kinloch Houran.

They were seated on the bench, upon the little platform, at the top of
the ascent which looked down upon the castle. The sound of Mrs.
Forrester's voice was quite audible behind in the house, pouring forth a
gentle stream. The sun was setting in a sky full of gorgeous purple and
golden clouds; the keen air of the hills blowing about them. But Julia
was warmly dressed, and only shivered a little out of a sense of what
was becoming: and Oona was wrapped in the famous fur cloak.

"It is so strange to come upon a place one has heard so much of," Julia
resumed. "No doubt you know Lord Erradeen?"

The name startled Oona in spite of herself. She was not prepared for any
allusion to him. She coloured involuntarily, and gave her companion a
look of surprise.

"Do you know him?" she asked.

"Oh, so well! I have known him almost all my life. People said
indeed----" said Julia, breaking off suddenly with a laugh. "But that
was nonsense. You know how people talk. Oh, yes, we have been like
brother and sister--or if not quite that--at least--Oh yes, I know
Walter, and his mother, and everything about him. He has been a little
strange since he came here; though indeed I have no reason to say so,
for he is always very nice to me. When he came home last year I saw a
great deal of him; but I don't think he was very communicative
about--what do you call it?--Kinloch----"

"He was not here long," Oona said.

"No? He did not give himself time to find out how many nice people there
are. He did not seem very happy about it when he came back. You see all
his habits were formed--it was something so new for him. And though the
people are extremely nice, and so hospitable and kind, they were
different--from those he had been used to."

Oona smiled a little. She did not see her new acquaintance from the best
side, and there came into her mind a slightly bitter and astonished
reflection that Walter, perhaps, preferred people like _this_ to
other--people. It was an altogether incoherent thought.

"Does he know that you are here?" she said.

"Oh, I don't think he does--but he will soon find me out," said Julia,
with an answering smile. "He always tells me everything. We are such old
friends, and perhaps something--more. To be sure that is not a thing to
talk of; but there is something in your face which is so sweet, which
invites confidence. With a little encouragement I believe I should tell
you everything I ever did."

She leant over Oona as if she would have kissed her: but compliments so
broad and easy disconcerted the Highland girl. She withdrew a little
from this close contact.

"The wind is getting cold," she said. "Perhaps we ought to go in. My
mother always blames me for keeping strangers, who are not used to it,
in this chilly air."

"Ah, you do not encourage me," Julia said. And then after a pause added,
with the look of one preoccupied by her subject--"Is he there now?"

"I think Lord Erradeen is still at Kinloch Houran, if that is what you
mean. That is another house of his among the trees."

"How curious! two houses so close together. If you see him," said Julia,
rising to join her cousin who had come out to the door of the cottage
with Mrs. Forrester, "if you see him, don't, please don't, tell him you
have met me. I prefer that he should find it out. He is quite sure, oh,
sooner than I want him, to find me out."

And then the ladies were attended to the boat in the usual hospitable
way.

"You will get back before it is dark," said Mrs. Forrester. "I am always
glad of that, for the wind is cold from the hills, especially to
strangers that are not used to our Highland climate. I take your visit
very kind, Lady Herbert. In these days I can do so little for my
friends: unless Sir Thomas would take his lunch with me some day--and
that is no compliment to a gentleman that is out on the hills all his
time--I have just no opportunity of showing attention. But if you are
going further north, my son, the present Mr. Forrester of Eaglescairn,
would be delighted to be of any service. He knows how little his mother
can do for her friends, perched up here in the middle of the water and
without a gentleman in the house. Hamish, have ye got the cushions in,
and are ye all ready? You'll be sure to take her ladyship to where the
carriage is waiting, and see that she has not a long way to walk."

Thus talking, the kind lady saw her visitors off, and stood on the beach
waving her hand to them. The fur cloak had been transferred to her
shoulders. It was the one wrap in which everybody believed. Oona, who
moved so much more quickly, and had no need to pause to take breath, did
not now require such careful wrapping. She too stood and waved her hand
as the boat turned the corner of the isle. But her farewells were not so
cordial as her mother's. Julia's talk had been very strange to Oona; it
filled her with a vague fear. Something very different from the
sensation with which she had heard Katie's confessions on the subject of
Lord Erradeen moved her now. An impression of unworthiness had stolen
into her mind, she could not tell how. It was the first time she had
been sensible of any thought of the kind. Walter had not been revealed
to her in any of the circumstances of his past life. She had known him
only during his visit at Kinloch Houran, and when he was in profound
difficulty and agitation, in which her presence and succour had helped
him she could not tell how, and when his appeal to her, his dependence
on her, had seized hold of her mind and imagination with a force which
it had taken her all this time to throw off, and which, alas! his first
appearance and renewed appeal to her to stand by him had brought back
again in spite of her resistance and against her will. She had been
angry with herself and indignant at this involuntary subjugation--which
he had not desired so far as she knew, nor she dreamt of, until she had
fallen under it--and had recognised, with a sort of despair and angry
sense of impotence, the renewal of the influence, which she seemed
incapable of resisting.

But Julia's words roused in her a different sentiment. Julia's laugh,
the light insinuations of her tone, her claim of intimacy and previous
knowledge, brought a revulsion of feeling so strong and powerful that
she felt for the moment as if she had been delivered from her bonds.
Delivered--but not with any pleasure in being free: for the deliverance
meant the lowering of the image of him in whom she had suddenly found
that union of something above her with something below, which is the
man's chief charm to the woman, as probably it is the woman's chief
charm to the man. He had been below her, he had needed her help, she had
brought to him some principle of completeness, some moral support which
was indispensable, without which he could not have stood fast. But now
another kind of inferiority was suggested to her, which was not that in
which a visionary and absolute youthful mind could find any charm, which
it was difficult even to tolerate, which was an offence to her and to
the pure and overmastering sentiment which had drawn her to him. If he
was so near to Miss Herbert, so entirely on her level, making her his
confidant, he could be nothing to Oona. She seemed to herself to burst
her bonds and stand free--but not happily. Her heart was not the lighter
for it. She would have liked to escape, yet to be able to bear him the
same stainless regard, the same sympathy as ever; to help him still, to
honour him in his resistance to all that was evil.

All this happened on the afternoon of the day which Walter had begun
with a despairing conviction that Oona's help must fail him _when she
knew_. She had begun to know without any agency of his: and if it moved
her so to become aware of a frivolous and foolish connection in which
there was levity and vanity, and a fictitious counterfeit of higher
sentiments but no harm, what would her feelings be when all the truth
was unfolded to her? But neither did she know of the darker depths that
lay below, nor was he aware of the revelation which had begun. Oona
returned to the house with her mother's soft-voiced monologue in her
ears, hearing vaguely a great many particulars of Lady Herbert's family
and connections and of her being "really an acquisition, and Sir Thomas
just an honest English sort of man, and Miss Herbert very pretty, and a
nice companion for you, Oona," without reply, or with much consciousness
of what it was. "It is time you were indoors, mamma, for the wind is
very cold," she said.

"Oh yes, Oona, it is very well for you to speak about me: but you must
take your own advice and come in too. For you have nothing about your
shoulders, and I have got the fur cloak."

"I am coming, mother," Oona said, and with these words turned from the
door and going to the rocky parapet that bordered the little platform,
cast an indignant glance towards the ruined walls so far beneath her on
the water's edge, dark and cold, out of the reach of all those autumn
glories that were fading in the sky. There was no light or sign of life
about Kinloch Houran. She had looked out angrily, as one defrauded of
much honest feeling had, she felt, a right to do; but something softened
her as she looked and gazed--the darkness of it, the pathos of the ruin,
the incompleteness, and voiceless yet appealing need. Was it possible
that there was no need at all or vacancy there but what Miss Herbert,
with her smiles and dimples, her laughing insinuations, her claim upon
him from the past, and the first preference of youth, could supply?
Oona felt a great sadness take the place of her indignation as she
turned away. If that was so, how poor and small it all was--how
different from what she had thought!




CHAPTER III.


This was not the only danger that once more overshadowed the path of
Lord Erradeen. Underwood had been left alone in one of those foreign
centres of "pleasure," so called, whither he had led his so often
impatient and unruly pupil. He had been left, without notice, by a
sudden impulse, such as he was now sufficiently acquainted with in
Walter--who had always the air of obeying angrily and against his will
the temptations with which he was surrounded: a sort of moral
indignation against himself and all that aided in his degradation
curiously mingling with the follies and vices into which he was led. You
never knew when you had him, was Captain Underwood's own description. He
would dart aside at a tangent, go off at the most unlikely moment, dash
down the cup when it was at the sweetest, and abandon with disgust the
things that had seemed to please him most. And Underwood knew that the
moment was coming when his patron and _protégé_ must return home: but
notwithstanding he was left, without warning, as by a sudden caprice;
the young man, who scorned while he yielded to his influence, having
neither respect nor regard enough for his companion to leave a word of
explanation. Underwood was astonished and angry as a matter of course,
but his anger soon subsided, and the sense of Lord Erradeen's importance
to him was too strong to leave room for lasting resentment, or at least
for anything in the shape of relinquishment. He was not at all disposed
to give the young victim up. Already he had tasted many of what to him
were the sweets of life by Walter's means, and there were endless
capabilities in Lord Erradeen's fortune and in his unsettled mind, which
made a companion like Underwood too wise ever to take offence, necessary
to him--which that worthy would not let slip. After the shock of finding
himself deserted, he took two or three days to consider the matter, and
then he made his plan. It was bold, yet he thought not too bold. He
followed in the very track of his young patron, passing through
Edinburgh and reaching Auchnasheen on the same momentous day which had
witnessed Julia Herbert's visit to the isle. Captain Underwood was very
well known at Auchnasheen. He had filled in many ways the position of
manager and steward to the last lord. He had not been loved, but yet he
had not been actively disliked. If there was some surprise and a little
resistance on the part of the household there was at least no open
revolt. They received him coldly, and required considerable explanation
of the many things which he required to be done. They were all aware, as
well as he was, that Lord Erradeen was to be expected from day to day,
and they had made such preparations for his arrival as suggested
themselves: but these were not many, and did not at all please the
zealous captain. His affairs, he felt, were at a critical point. It was
very necessary that the young man should feel the pleasure of being
expected, the surprise of finding everything arranged according to his
tastes.

"You know very well that he will come here exhausted, that he will want
to have everything comfortable," he said to the housekeeper and the
servants. "No one would like after a fatiguing journey to come into a
bare sort of a miserable place like this."

"My lord is no so hard to please," said the housekeeper, standing her
ground. "Last year he just took no notice. Whatever was done he was not
heeding."

"Because he was unused to everything: now it is different; and I mean to
have things comfortable for him."

"Well, captain! I am sure it's none of my wish to keep the poor young
gentleman from his bits of little comforts. Ye'll have _his_ authority?"

"Oh, yes, I have his authority. It will be for your advantage to mind
what I tell you; even more than with the late lord. I've been abroad
with him. He left me but a short time ago; I was to follow him, and look
after everything."

At this the housekeeper looked at the under-factor Mr. Shaw's
subordinate, who had come to intimate to her her master's return. "Will
that be all right, Mr. Adamson?" Adamson put his shaggy head on one side
like an intelligent dog and looked at the stranger. But they all knew
Captain Underwood well enough, and no one was courageous enough to
contradict him.

"It will, maybe, be as ye say," said the under-factor cautiously.
"Anyway it will do us no harm to take his orders," he added, in an
undertone to the woman. "He was always very far ben with the old lord."

"The worse for him," said that important functionary under her breath.
But she agreed with Adamson afterwards that as long as it was my lord's
comfort he was looking after and not his own, his orders should be
obeyed. As with every such person, the household distrusted this
confident and unpaid major domo. But Underwood had not been tyrannical
in his previous reign, and young Lord Erradeen during his last residence
at Auchnasheen had frightened them all. He had been like a man beside
himself. If the captain could manage him better, they would be grateful
to the captain; and thus Underwood, though by no means confident of a
good reception, had no serious hindrances to encounter. He strolled
forth when he had arranged everything to "look about him." He saw the
Birkenbraes boat pass in the evening light, returning from the castle,
with a surprise which took away his breath. The boat was near enough to
the shore as it passed to be recognised and its occupants; but not even
Katie, whose eyesight was so keen, recognised the observer on the
beach. He remarked that the party were in earnest conversation,
consulting with each other over something, which seemed to secure
everybody's attention, so that the ordinary quick notice of a stranger,
which is common to country people, was not called forth by his own
appearance. It surprised him mightily to see that such visitors had
ventured to Kinloch Houran. They never would have done so in the time of
the last lord. Had Walter all at once become more friendly, more
open-hearted, perhaps feeling in the company of his neighbours a certain
safety? Underwood was confounded by this new suggestion. It did not
please him. Nothing could be worse for himself than that Lord Erradeen
should find amusement in the society of the neighbourhood. There would
be no more riot if this was the case, no "pleasure," no play; but
perhaps a wife--most terrible of all anticipations. Underwood had been
deeply alarmed before by Katie Williamson's ascendancy; but when Lord
Erradeen returned to his own influence, he had believed that risk to be
over. If, however, it recurred again, and, in this moment while
undefended by his, Underwood's, protection, if the young fellow had
rushed into the snare once more, the captain felt that the incident
would acquire new significance.

There were women whom he might have tolerated if better could not be.
Julia Herbert was one whom he could perhaps--it was possible--have "got
on with," though possibly she would have changed after her marriage; but
with Katie, Underwood knew that he never would get on. If this were so
he would have at once to disappear. All his hopes would be over--his
prospect of gain or pleasure by means of Lord Erradeen. And he had "put
up with" so much! nobody knew how much he had put up with. He had
humoured the young fellow, and endured his fits of temper, his changes
of purpose, his fantastic inconsistencies of every kind. What friendship
it was on his part, after Erradeen had deserted him, left him planted
there--as if he cared for the d---- place where he had gone only to
please the young'un! thus to put all his grievances in his pocket and
hurry over land and sea to make sure that all was comfortable for the
ungrateful young man! That was true friendship, by Jove; what a man
would do for a man! not like a woman that always had to be waited upon.
Captain Underwood felt that his vested rights were being assailed, and
that if it came to this it would be a thing to be resisted with might
and main. A wife! what did Erradeen want with a wife? Surely it would be
possible to put before him the charms of liberty once more and prevent
the sacrifice. He walked along the side of the loch almost keeping up
with the boat, hot with righteous indignation, in spite of the cold wind
which had driven Mrs. Forrester into the house. Presently he heard the
sound of salutations on the water, of oars clanking upon rowlocks from a
different quarter, and saw the boat from the isle--Hamish rowing in his
red shirt--meet with the large four-oared boat from Birkenbraes and
pause while the women's voices exchanged a few sentences, chorused by
Mr. Williamson's bass. Then the smaller boat came on towards the shore,
towards the point near which a carriage was waiting. Captain Underwood
quickened his steps a little, and he it was who presented himself to
Julia Herbert's eyes as she approached the bit of rocky beach, and
hurrying down, offered his hand to help her.

"What a strange meeting," cried Julia; "what a small world, as everybody
says! Who could have thought, Captain Underwood, of seeing you here?"

"I might reply, if the surprise were not so delightful, who could have
thought, Miss Herbert, of seeing you here? for myself it is a second
home to me, and has been for years."

"My reason for being here is simple. Let me introduce you to my cousin,
Lady Herbert. Sir Thomas has got the shootings lower down. I suppose you
are with Lord Erradeen."

Lady Herbert had given the captain a very distant bow. She did not like
the looks of him, as indeed it has been stated no ladies did, whether in
Sloebury or elsewhere; but at the name of Erradeen she paid a more
polite attention, though the thought of her horses waiting so long in
the cold was already grievous to her. "I hope," she said, "that Lord
Erradeen does not lodge his friends in that old ruin, as he does
himself, people say."

"We are at Auchnasheen, a house you may see among the trees," said the
captain. "Feudal remains are captivating, but not to live in. Does our
friend Walter know, Miss Herbert, what happiness awaits him in your
presence here?"

"What a pretty speech," Julia cried; "far prettier than anything Walter
could muster courage to say. No, Captain Underwood, he does not. It was
all settled quite suddenly. I did not even know that he was here."

"Julia, the horses have been waiting a long time," said Lady Herbert. "I
have no doubt Lord Erradeen is a very interesting subject--but I don't
know what Barber (who was the coachman) will say. I shall be glad to see
your friends any day at luncheon. Tell Lord Erradeen, please. We are two
women alone, Sir Thomas is on the hills all day; all the more we shall
be glad to see him--I mean you both--if you will take pity on our
loneliness. Now, Julia, we really must not wait any longer."

"Tell Walter I shall look for him," said Julia, kissing her hand as they
drove away. Underwood stood and looked after the carriage with varied
emotions. As against Katie Williamson, he was overjoyed to have such an
auxiliary--a girl who would not stand upon any punctilio--who would
pursue her object with any assistance she could pick up, and would not
be above an alliance defensive or offensive, a girl who knew the
advantage of an influential friend. So far as that went he was glad:
but, heavens! what a neighbourhood, bristling with women; a girl at
every corner ready to decoy his prey out of his hands. He was rueful,
even though he was in a measure satisfied. If he could play his cards
sufficiently well to detach Walter from both one and the other, to show
the bondage which was veiled under Julia's smiles and complacency, as
well as under Katie's uncompromising code, and to carry him off under
their very eyes, that would indeed be a triumph; but failing that, it
was better for him to make an ally of Julia, and push her cause, than to
suffer himself to be ousted by the other, the little parvenue, with her
cool impertinence, who had been the first, he thought, to set Walter
against him.

He walked back to Auchnasheen, full of these thoughts, and of plans to
recover his old ascendancy. He had expedients for doing this which would
not bear recording, and a hundred hopes of awakening the passions, the
jealousies, the vanity of the young man whom already he had been able to
sway beyond his expectations. He believed that he had led Walter by the
nose, as he said, and had a mastery over him which would be easily
recovered if he but got him for a day or two to himself. It was a matter
of fact that he had done him much, if not fatal harm; and if the captain
had been clever enough to know that he had no mastery whatever over his
victim, and that Walter was the slave of his own shifting and uneasy
moods, of his indolences and sudden impulses, and immediate abandonment
of himself to the moment, but not of Captain Underwood, that tempter
might have done him still more harm. But he did not possess this finer
perception, and thus lost a portion of his power.

He went back to Auchnasheen to find a comfortable dinner, a good fire, a
cheerful room, full of light and comfort, which reminded him of "old
days," which he gave a regretful yet comfortable thought to in
passing--the time when he had waited, not knowing what moment the old
lord, his former patron, should return from Kinloch Houran. And now he
was waiting for the other--who was so unlike the old lord--and yet had
already been of more use to Underwood, and served him better in his own
way, than the old lord had ever done. He was much softened, and even
perhaps a little maudlin in his thoughts of Walter as he sat over that
comfortable fire. What was he about, poor boy? Not so comfortable as
this friend and retainer, who was drinking his wine and thinking of him.
But he should find some one to welcome him when he returned. He should
find a comfortable meal and good company, which was more than the
foolish fellow would expect. It was foolish of him, in his temper, to
dart away from those who really cared for him, who really could be of
use to him; but by this time the young lord would be too glad, after his
loneliness, to come back and find a faithful friend ready to make
allowances for him, and so well acquainted with his circumstances here.

So well acquainted with his circumstances! Underwood, in his time, had
no doubt wondered over these as much as any one; but that was long ago,
and he had in the mean time become quite familiar with them, and did not
any longer speculate on the subject. He had no supernatural curiosity
for his part. He could understand that one would not like to see a
ghost: and he believed in ghosts--in a fine, healthy, vulgar, natural
apparition, with dragging chains and hollow groans. But as for anything
else, he had never entered into the question, nor had he any thought of
doing so now. However, as he sat by the fire with all these comfortable
accessories round him, and listened now and then to hear if any one was
coming, and sometimes was deceived by the wind in the chimneys, or the
sound of the trees in the fresh breeze which had become keener and
sharper since he came indoors, it happened, how he could not tell, that
questions arose in the captain's mind such as he had never known before.

The house was very still, the servants' apartments were at a
considerable distance from the sitting-rooms, and all was very quiet.
Two or three times in the course of the evening, old Symington, who had
also come to see that everything was in order for his master, walked all
the way from these retired regions through a long passage running from
one end of the house to the other, to the great door, which he opened
cautiously, then shut again, finding nobody in sight, and retired the
same way as he came, his shoes creaking all the way. This interruption
occurring at intervals had a remarkable effect upon Underwood. He began
to wait for its recurrence, to count the steps, to feel a thrill of
alarm as they passed the door of the room in which he was sitting. Oh,
yes, no doubt it was Symington, who always wore creaking shoes, confound
him! But what if it were not Symington? What if it might be some one
else, some mysterious being who might suddenly open the door, and freeze
into stone the warm, palpitating, somewhat unsteady person of a man who
had eaten a very good dinner and drunk a considerable quantity of wine?
This thought so penetrated his mind, that gradually all his thoughts
were concentrated on the old servant's perambulation, watching for it
before it came, thinking of it after it had passed. The steady and
solemn march at intervals, which seemed calculated and regular, was
enough to have impressed the imagination of any solitary person. And the
captain was of a primitive simplicity of mind in some respects. His
fears paralysed him; he was afraid to get up, to open the door, to make
sure what it was. How could he tell that he might not be seized by the
hair of the head by some ghastly apparition, and dragged into a chamber
of horrors! He tried to fortify himself with more wine, but that only
made his tremor worse. Finally the panic came to a crisis, when
Symington, pausing, knocked at the library door. Underwood remembered to
have heard that no spirit could enter without invitation, and he shut
his mouth firmly that no habitual "come in" might lay him open to the
assault of the enemy. He sat breathless through the ensuing moment of
suspense, while Symington waited outside. The captain's hair stood up on
his head; his face was covered with a profuse dew; he held by the table
in an agony of apprehension when he saw the door begin to turn slowly
upon its hinges.

"My lord will not be home the night," said Symington, slowly.

The sight of the old servant scarcely quieted the perturbation of
Underwood. It had been a terrible day for Symington. He was ashy pale or
grey, as old men become when the blood is driven from their faces. He
had not been able to get rid of the scared and terror-stricken sensation
with which he had watched the Birkenbraes party climbing the old stairs,
and wandering as he thought at the peril of their lives upon the unsafe
battlements. He had been almost violent in his calls to them to come
down: but nobody had taken any notice, and they had talked about their
guide and about the gentleman who was living with Lord Erradeen, till it
seemed to Symington that he must go distracted. "Where there ever such
fools--such idiots! since there is nobody staying with Lord Erradeen but
me, his body servant," the old man had said tremulously to himself. At
Symington's voice the captain gave a start and a cry. Even in the relief
of discovering who it was, he could not quiet the excitement of his
nerves.

"It's you, old Truepenny," he cried, yet looked at him across the table
with a tremor, and a very forced and uncomfortable smile.

"That's not my name," said Symington, with, on his side, the irritation
of a disturbed mind. "I'm saying that it's getting late, and my lord
will not be home to-night."

"By Jove!" cried Captain Underwood, "when I heard you passing from one
end of the house to the other, I thought it might be--the old fellow
over there, coming himself----"

"I cannot tell, sir, what you are meaning by the old fellow over there.
There's no old fellow I know of but old Macalister; and it was not for
him you took me."

"If you could have heard how your steps sounded through the house! By
Jove! I could fancy I hear them now."

"Where?" Symington cried, coming in and shutting the door, which he held
with his hand behind him, as if to bar all possible comers. And then the
two men looked at each other, both breathless and pale.

"Sit down," said Underwood. "The house feels chilly and dreary, nobody
living in it for so long. Have a glass of wine. One wants company in a
damp, dreary old hole like this."

"You are very kind, captain," said the old man; "but Auchnasheen, though
only my lord's shooting-box, is a modern mansion, and full of every
convenience. It would ill become me to raise an ill name on it."

"I wonder what Erradeen's about?" said the captain. "I bet he's worse
off than we are. How he must wish he was off with me on the other side
of the Channel."

"Captain! you will, maybe, think little of me, being nothing but a
servant; but it is little good you do my young lord on the ither side of
the Channel."

Underwood laughed, but not with his usual vigour.

"What can I do with your young lord," he said. "He takes the bit in his
teeth, and goes--to the devil his own way."

"Captain, there are some that think the like of you sore to blame."

Underwood said nothing for a moment. When he spoke there was a quiver in
his voice.

"Let me see the way to my room, Symington. Oh yes, I suppose it is the
old room; but I've forgotten. I was there before? well, so I suppose;
but I have forgotten. Take the candle as I tell you, and show me the
way."

He had not the least idea what he feared, and he did not remember ever
having feared anything before; but to-night he hung close to Symington,
following at his very heels. The old man was anxious and alarmed, but
not in this ignoble way. He deposited the captain in his room with
composure, who would but for very shame have implored him to stay. And
then his footsteps sounded through the vacant house, going further and
further off till they died away in the distance. Captain Underwood
locked his door, though he felt it was a vain precaution, and hastened
to hide his head under the bed-clothes: but he was well aware that this
was a vain precaution too.




CHAPTER IV.


It was on the evening of the day after Captain Underwood's arrival that
Lord Erradeen left Kinloch Houran for Auchnasheen. After labour, rest.
He could not but compare as he walked along in the early falling
autumnal twilight the difference between himself now, and the same self
a year ago, when he had fled from the place of torture to the house of
peace, a man nearly frantic with the consciousness of all the new bonds
upon him, the uncomprehended powers against which he had to struggle,
the sense of panic and impotence, yet of mad excitement and resistance,
with which his brain was on flame. The recollection of the ensuing time
spent at Auchnasheen, when he saw no one, heard no voice but his own,
yet lived through day after day of bewildering mental conflict, without
knowing who it was against whom he contended, was burned in upon his
recollection. All through that time he had been conscious of such a
desire to flee as hurried the pace of his thoughts, and made the
intolerable still more intolerable. His heart had sickened of the
unbearable fight into which he was compelled like an unwilling soldier
with death behind him. To resist had always been Walter's natural
impulse; but the impulse of flight had so mingled with it that his soul
had been in a fever, counting no passage of days, but feeling the whole
period long or short, he did not know which, as one monstrous
uninterrupted day or night, in which the processes of thought were never
intermitted. His mind was in a very different condition now. He had got
over the early panic of nature. The blinding mists of terror had melted
away from his eyes, and the novelty and horror of his position,
contending with unseen dominations and powers, had almost ceased for the
moment to affect his mind, so profoundly exhausted was he by the renewed
struggle in which he had been engaged.

The loch was veiled in mist, through which it glimmered faintly with
broken reflections, the wooded banks presenting on every side a sort of
ghostly outline, with the colour no more than indicated against the
dreary confusion of air and vapour. At some points there was the glimpse
of a blurred light, looking larger and more distant than it really was,
the ruddy spot made by the open door of the little inn, the whiter and
smaller twinkle of the manse window, the far-off point, looking no more
than a taper light in the distance, that shone from the isle. There was
in Walter's mind a darkness and confusion not unlike the landscape. He
was worn out: there was in him none of that vivid feeling which had
separated between his human soul in its despair and the keen sweetness
of the morning. Now all was night within him and around. His arms had
fallen from his hands. He moved along, scarcely aware that he was
moving, feeling everything blurred, confused, indistinct in the earth
about him and in the secret places of his soul. Desire for flight he had
none: he had come to see that it was impossible: and he had not energy
enough to wish it. And fear had died out of him. He was not afraid. Had
he been joined on the darkling way by the personage of whom he had of
late seen so much, it would scarcely have quickened his pulses. All such
superficial emotion had died out of him: the real question was so much
superior, so infinitely important in comparison with any such transitory
tremors as these. But at the present moment he was not thinking at all,
scarcely living, any more than the world around him was living, hushed
into a cessation of all energy and almost of consciousness, looking
forward to night and darkness and repose.

It was somewhat surprising to him to see the lighted windows at
Auchnasheen, and the air of inhabitation about the house with which he
had no agreeable associations, but only those which are apt to hang
about a place in which one has gone through a fever, full of miserable
visions, and the burning restlessness of disease. But when he stepped
into the hall, the door being opened to him by Symington as soon as his
foot was heard on the gravel, and turning round to go into the library
found himself suddenly in the presence of Captain Underwood, his
astonishment and dismay were beyond expression. The dismay came even
before the flush of anger, which was the first emotion that showed
itself. Underwood stood holding open the library door, with a smile that
was meant to be ingratiating and conciliatory. He held out his hand, as
Walter, with a start and exclamation, recognised him.

"Yes," he said, "I'm here, you see. Not so easy to get rid of when once
I form a friendship. Welcome to your own house, Erradeen."

Walter did not say anything till he had entered the room and shut the
door. He walked to the fire, which was blazing brightly, and placed
himself with his back to it, in that attitude in which the master of a
house defies all comers.

"I did not expect to find you here," he said. "You take me entirely by
surprise."

"I had hoped it would be an agreeable surprise," said the captain, still
with his most amiable smile. "I thought to have a friend's face waiting
for you when you came back from that confounded place would be a
relief."

"What do you call a confounded place?" said Walter, testily. "You know
nothing about it, as far as I am aware. No, Underwood, it is as well to
speak plainly. It is not an agreeable surprise. I am sorry you have
taken the trouble to come so far for me."

"It was no trouble. If you are a little out of sorts, never mind. I am
not a man to be discouraged for a hasty word. You want a little cheerful
society----"

"Is that what you call yourself?" Walter said with a harsh laugh. He was
aware that there was a certain brutality in what he said; but the sudden
sight of the man who had disgusted him even while he had most influenced
him, and of whom he had never thought but with a movement of resentment
and secret rage, affected him to a sort of delirium. He could have
seized him with the force of passion and flung him into the loch at the
door. It would have been no crime, he thought, to destroy such vermin
off the face of the earth--to make an end of such a source of evil would
be no crime. This was the thought in his mind while he stood upon his
own hearth, looking at the man who was his guest and therefore sacred.
As for Captain Underwood, he took no offence; it was not in his _rôle_
to do so, whatever happened. What he had to do was to regain, if
possible, his position with the young man upon whom he had lived and
enriched himself for the greater part of the year, to render himself
indispensable to him as he had done to his predecessor. For this object
he was prepared to bear everything, and laugh at all that was too strong
to be ignored. He laughed now, and did his best, not very gracefully, to
carry out the joke. He exerted himself to talk and please throughout the
dinner, which Walter went through in silence, drinking largely, though
scarcely eating at all--for Kinloch Houran was not a place which
encouraged an appetite. After dinner, in the midst of one of
Underwood's stories, Walter lighted a candle abruptly, and saying he was
going to bed, left his companion without apology or reason given. It was
impossible to be more rude. The captain felt the check, for he had a
considerable development of vanity, and was in the habit of amusing the
people to whom he chose to make himself agreeable. But this affront,
too, he swallowed. "He will have come to himself by morning," he said.
In the morning, however, Walter was only more gloomy and unwilling to
listen, and determined not to respond. It was only when in the middle of
the breakfast he received a note brought by a mounted messenger who
waited for an answer, that he spoke. He flung it open across the table
to Underwood with a harsh laugh.

"Is this your doing, too?" he cried.

"My doing, Erradeen!"

Underwood knew very well what it was before he looked at it. It was from
Lady Herbert, explaining that she had only just heard that Lord Erradeen
was so near a neighbour, and begging him, if he was not, like all the
other gentlemen, on the hills, that he would come ("and your friend
Captain Underwood") to luncheon that day to cheer two forlorn ladies
left all by themselves in this wilderness. "And you will meet an old
friend," it concluded playfully. The composition was Julia's, and had
not been produced without careful study.

"My doing!" said Captain Underwood. "Can you suppose that _I_ want you
to marry, Erradeen?"

It was a case, he thought, in which truth was best.

Walter started up from his seat.

"Marry!" he cried, with a half-shout of rage and dismay.

"Well, my dear fellow, I don't suppose you are such a fool; but, of
course, that is what _she_ means. The fair Julia----"

"Oblige me," cried Lord Erradeen, taking up once more his position on
the hearth, "by speaking civilly when you speak of ladies in my house."

"Why, bless me, Erradeen, you gave me the note----"

"I was a fool--that is nothing new. I have been a fool since the first
day when I met you and took you for something more than mortal. Oh, and
before that!" cried Walter bitterly. "Do not flatter yourself that you
did it. It is of older date than you."

"The fair Julia----" Underwood began; but he stopped when his companion
advanced upon him threatening, with so gloomy a look and so tightly
strained an arm that the captain judged it wise to change his tone. "I
should have said, since we are on punctilio, that Miss Herbert and you
are older acquaintances than you and I, Erradeen."

"Fortunately you have nothing to do with that," Walter said, perceiving
the absurdity of his rage.

Then he walked to the window and looked out so long and silently that
the anxious watcher began to think the incident over. But it was not
till Walter, after this period of reflection, had written a note and
sent it to the messenger, that he ventured to speak.

"You have accepted, of course. In the circumstances it would be
uncivil----"

Walter looked at him for a moment, breaking off his sentence as if he
had spoken.

"I have something to tell you," he said. "My mother is coming to
Auchnasheen."

"Your mother!" Underwood's voice ran into a quaver of dismay.

"You will see that in the circumstances, as you say, I am forced to be
uncivil. When my mother is here she will, of course, be the mistress of
the house; and she, as you know----"

"Will not ask me to prolong my visit," said the captain, with an attempt
at rueful humour. "I think we may say as much as that, Erradeen."

"I fear it is not likely," Walter said.

Captain Underwood gave vent to his feelings in a prolonged whistle.

"You will be bored to death. Mark my words, I know you well enough. You
will never be able to put up with it. You will be ready to hang yourself
in a week. You will come off to me. It is the best thing that could
happen so far as I am concerned--wishing to preserve your friendship as
I do----"

"Is it friendship, then, that has bound us together?" said Lord
Erradeen.

"What else? Disinterested friendship on my part. I take your laugh
rather ill, Erradeen. What have I gained by it, I should like to know?
I've liked you, and I liked the last man before you. I have put up with
a great deal from you--tempers like a silly woman, vagaries of all
sorts, discontent and abuse. Why have I put up with all that?"

"Why indeed? I wish you had not," said the young man scornfully. "Yes,
you have put up with it, and made your pupil think the worse of you with
every fresh exercise of patience. I should like to pay you for all that
dirty work."

"Pay me!" the captain said, faltering a little. He was not a very brave
man, though he could hold his own; and there was a force of passion and
youth in his "pupil"--with what bitterness that word was said!--that
alarmed him a little. Besides, Walter had a household of servants behind
him--grooms, keepers, all sorts of people--who held Captain Underwood in
no favour. "Pay me! I don't know how you could pay me," he said.

"I should like to do it--in one way; and I shall do it--in another,"
said Walter still somewhat fiercely. Then once more he laughed. He took
out a pocket-book from his coat, and out of that a cheque. "You have
been at some expense on my account," he said; "your journey has been
long and rapid. I consider myself your debtor for that, and for
the--good intention. Will this be enough?"

In the bitter force of his ridicule and dislike, Walter held out the
piece of paper as one holds a sweetmeat to a child. The other gave a
succession of rapid glances at it to make out what it was. When he
succeeded in doing so a flush of excitement and eagerness covered his
face. He put out his hand nervously to clutch it with the excited look
of the child before whom a prize is held out, and who catches at it
before it is snatched away. But he would not acknowledge this feeling.

"My lord," he said, with an appearance of dignity offended, "you are
generous; but to pay me, as you say, and offer money in place of your
friendship----"

"It is an excellent exchange, Underwood. This is worth something, if not
very much--the other," said Walter with a laugh, "nothing at all."

Perhaps this was something like what Captain Underwood himself thought,
as he found himself, a few hours later, driving along the country roads
towards the railway station, retracing the path which he had travelled
two days before with many hopes and yet a tremor. His hopes were now
over, and the tremor too; but there was something in his breast pocket
better, for the moment at least, than any hopes, which kept him warm,
even though the wind was cold. He had failed in his attempt to fix
himself once more permanently on Lord Erradeen's shoulders--an attempt
in which he had not been very sanguine. It was a desperate venture, he
knew, and it had failed; but, at the same time, circumstances might
arise which would justify another attempt, and that one might not fail:
and, in the mean time, his heart rose with a certain elation when he
thought of that signature in his breast pocket. _That_ was worth an
effort, and nothing could diminish its value. Friendship might fail, but
a cheque is substantial. He had something of the dizzy feeling of one
who has fallen from a great height, and has not yet got the giddiness of
the movement out of his head. And yet he was not altogether discouraged.
Who could tell what turn the wheel of fortune might take? and, in the
mean time, there was that bit of paper. The horse was fresh, and flew
along the road, up and down, at a pace very different from that of Big
John's steeds, which had brought Captain Underwood to Auchnasheen. About
half-way along he came up to the waggonette from Birkenbraes, in which
was Mr. Braithwaite and his luggage, along with two other guests,
ladies, bound for the station, and escorted by Mr. Williamson and Katie,
as was their way.

"Dear me, is that Underwood?" cried Mr. Williamson with the lively and
simple curiosity of rural use and wont. "So you're there, captain," he
said, as the dog-cart came up behind the heavier carriage.

"No, I'm not here--I'm going," said Underwood, quickly, "hurrying to
catch the train."

"Oh, there is plenty of time; we are going too (Bless me," he said
aside, "how many visitors think you they can have had in yon old place?)
I am thinking ye have been with our young neighbour, Lord Erradeen."

"That is an easy guess. I am leaving him, you mean. Erradeen is a
reformed character. He is turning over a new leaf--and full time too,"
Captain Underwood cried, raising his voice that he might be heard over
the rattle of the two carriages. Notwithstanding the cheque which kept
him so warm, he had various grudges against Walter, and did not choose
to lose the opportunity for a little mischief.

"It is always a good thing," said Mr. Williamson, "to turn over a new
leaf. We have all great occasion to do that."

"Especially when there are so many of them," the captain cried, as his
light cart passed the other. He met the party again at the station,
where they had to wait for the train. Katie stood by herself in a
thoughtful mood while the departing guests consulted over their several
boxes, and Captain Underwood seized the moment: "I am sorry to lose the
fun," he said, in a confidential tone, "but I must tell you, Miss
Williamson, what is going to happen. Erradeen has been pursued up here
into his stronghold by one of the many ladies----I expect to hear she
has clutched hold of him before long, and then you'll have a wedding."

"Is that why you are going away, Captain Underwood?"

"He has gone a little too far, you know, that is the truth," said the
captain. "I am glad he is not going to take in any nice girl. I couldn't
have stood by and seen that. I should have had to warn her people. Even
Miss Julia, by Jove! I'm sorry for Miss Julia, if she gets him. But she
is an old campaigner; she will know how to take care of herself."

"Is it because Lord Erradeen is so bad that you are leaving him, or
because he is going to be good?" Katie asked. Captain Underwood on
ordinary occasions was a little afraid of her; but his virtuous object
fortified him now.

"Oh, by Jove! he goes too far," said Underwood. "I am not squeamish,
heaven knows, but he goes too far. I can speak now that it's all over
between him and me. I never could bear to see him with nice girls; but
he's got his match in Miss Julia. The fair Julia--that is another pair
of shoes."

"Who was he meaning with his fair Julias?" said Mr. Williamson as they
drove away. "Yon's a scoundrel, if there ever was one, and young
Erradeen is well rid of him. But when thieves cast out, honest folk get
their ain. Would yon be true?"

Katie was in what her father called "a brown study," and did not care to
talk. She only shook her head--a gesture which could be interpreted as
any one pleased.

"I am not sure," said Mr. Williamson, in reply. "He knows more about
Lord Erradeen than any person on the loch. But who is the fair Julia,
and is he really to be married to her? I would like fine to hear all
about it. I will call at Auchnasheen in the afternoon and see what he
has to say."

But Katie remained in her brown study, letting her father talk. She knew
very well who the fair Julia was. She remembered distinctly the scene at
Burlington House. She saw with the clearest perception what the tactics
were of the ladies at the Lodge. Katie had been somewhat excited by the
prospect of being Oona's rival, which was like something in a book. It
was like the universal story of the young man's choice, not between
Venus and Minerva, or between good and evil, but perhaps, Katie thought,
between poetry and prose, between the ideal and the practical. She was
interested in that conflict and not unwilling in all kindness and honour
to play her part in it. Oona would be the ideal bride for him, but she
herself, Katie felt, would be better in a great many ways, and she did
not feel that she would have any objection to marry Lord Erradeen. But
here was another rival with whom she did not choose to enter the lists.
It is to be feared that Katie in her heart classified Miss Herbert as
Vice, as the sinner against whom every man is to be warned, and turned
with some scorn from any comparison with her meretricious attractions.
But she was fair and just, and her heart had nothing particular to do
with the matter; so that she was able calmly to wait for information,
which was not Oona's case.

It had been entirely at random that Lord Erradeen had announced his
mother's approaching arrival to Underwood. The idea had come into his
mind the moment before he made use of it, and he had felt a certain
amusement in the complete success of this hastily-assumed weapon. It had
been so effectual that he began to think it might be available in other
conflicts as well as this: and in any case he felt himself pledged to
make it a matter of fact. He walked to the village when Underwood had
gone, to carry at once his intention into effect. Though it was only a
cluster of some half-dozen houses, it had a telegraph-office--as is so
general in the Highlands--and Walter sent a brief, emphatic message,
which he felt would carry wild excitement into Sloebury. "You will do me
a great favour if you will come at once, alone," was Walter's message.
He was himself slightly excited by it. He began to think over all those
primitive relationships of his youth as he walked along the quiet road.
There was sweetness in them, but how much conflict, trouble,
embarrassment!--claims on one side to which the other could not
respond--a sort of authority, which was no authority--a duty which did
nothing but establish grievances and mutual reproach. His mind was still
in the state of exhaustion which Captain Underwood had only temporarily
disturbed; and a certain softening was in the weakened faculties, which
were worn out with too much conflict. Poor mother, after all! He could
remember, looking back, when it was his greatest pleasure to go home to
her, to talk to her, pouring every sort of revelation into her
never-wearied ears; all his school successes and tribulations, all
about the other fellows, the injustices that were done, the triumphs
that were gained. Could women interest themselves in all that as she had
seemed to interest herself? or had she sometimes found it a bore to have
all these schoolboy experiences poured forth upon her? Miss Merivale had
very plainly thought it a bore; his voice had given her a headache. But
Mrs. Methven never had any headaches, or anything that could cloud her
attention. He remembered now that his mother was not a mere nursery
woman--that she read a great deal more than he himself did, knew many
things he did not know, was not silly, or a fool, or narrow-minded, as
so many women are. Was it not a little hard, after all, that she should
have nothing of her son but the schoolboy prattle? She had been
everything to him when he was a boy, and now she was nothing to him;
perhaps all the time she might have been looking forward to the period
when he should be a man, and have something more interesting to talk
over with her than a cricket-match--for, to be sure, when one came to
think of it, she could have no personal interest in a cricket-match. A
momentary _serrement_ of compunction came to Walter's heart. Poor
mother! he said to himself; perhaps it was a little hard upon her. And
she must have the feeling, to make it worse, that she had a right to
something better. He could not even now get his mind clear about that
right.

As he returned from the telegraph-office he too met the waggonette from
Birkenbraes, which was stopped at sight of him with much energy on the
part of Mr. Williamson.

"We've just met your friend Captain Underwood. If you'll not take it
amiss, Lord Erradeen, I will say that I'm very glad you're not keeping a
man like that about you. But what is this about--a lady? I hear there's
a lady--the fair----What did he call her, Katie? I am not good at
remembering names."

"It is of no consequence," said Katie, with a little rising colour,
"what such a man said."

"That's true, that's true," said her father; "but still, Erradeen, you
must mind we are old friends now, and let us know what's coming. The
fair----Toots, I thought of it a minute ago? It's ridiculous to forget
names."

"You may be sure I shall let you know what's coming. My mother is
coming," Walter said.

And this piece of news was so unexpected and startling that the
Williamsons drove off with energy to spread it far and near. Mr.
Williamson himself was as much excited as if it had been of personal
importance to him.

"Now that will settle the young man," he said; "that will put many
things right. There has not been a lady at Auchnasheen since ever I have
been here. A mother is the next best thing to a wife, and very likely
the one is in preparation for the other, and ye will all have to put on
your prettiest frocks for her approval." He followed this with one of
his big laughs, looking round upon a circle in which there were various
young persons who were very marriageable. "But I put no faith in
Underwood's fair--what was it he called her?" Mr. Williamson said.




CHAPTER V.


Two days after, Mrs. Methven arrived at Kinloch Houran by the afternoon
coach, alone.

She had interpreted very literally the telegram which had brought such a
tremor yet such a movement of joy to her heart. Her son wanted her.
Perhaps he might be ill, certainly it must be for something serious and
painful that she was called; yet he wanted her! She had been very quiet
and patient, waiting if perhaps his heart might be touched and he might
recall the tie of nature and his own promises, feeling with a sad pride
that she wanted nothing of him but his love, and that without that the
fine houses and the new wealth were nothing to her. She was pleased even
to stand aloof, to be conscious of having in no way profited by Walter's
advancement. She had gained nothing by it, she wished to gain nothing by
it. If Walter were well, then there was no need for more. She had enough
for herself without troubling him. So long as all was well! But this is
at the best a forlorn line of argument, and it cannot be doubted that
Mrs. Methven's bosom throbbed with a great pang of disappointment when
she sat and smiled to conceal it, and answered questions about Walter,
yet could not say that she had seen him or any of his "places in
Scotland," or knew much more than her questioners did. When his message
arrived her heart leapt in her breast. There were no explanations, no
reason given, but that imperative call, such as mothers love to have
addressed to them: "Come;" all considerations of her own comfort set
aside in the necessity for her which had arisen at last. Another might
have resented so complete an indifference to what might happen to suit
herself. But there are connections and relationships in which this is
the highest compliment. He knew that it did not matter to her what her
own convenience was, as long as he wanted her. She got up from her chair
at once, and proceeded to put her things together to get ready for the
journey. With a smiling countenance she prepared herself for the night
train. She would not even take a maid. "He says, alone. He must have
some reason for it, I suppose," she said to Miss Merivale. "I am the
reason," said Cousin Sophy: "He doesn't want me. You can tell him, with
my love, that to travel all night is not at all in my way, and he need
have had no fear on that subject." But Mrs. Methven would not agree to
this, and departed hurriedly without any maid. She was surprised a
little, yet would not allow herself to be displeased, that no one came
to meet her: but it was somewhat forlorn to be set down on the side of
the loch in the wintry afternoon, with the cold, gleaming water before
her, and no apparent way of getting to the end of her journey.

"Oh yes, mem, you might drive round the head of the loch: but it's a
long way," the landlady of the little inn said, smoothing down her apron
at the door, "and far simpler just crossing the water, as everybody does
in these parts."

Mrs. Methven was a little nervous about crossing the water. She was
tired and disappointed, and a chill had crept to her heart. While she
stood hesitating a young lady came up, whose boat waited for her on the
beach, a man in a red shirt standing at the bow.

"It is a lady for Auchnasheen, Miss Oona," said the landlady, "and no
boat. Duncan is away, and for the moment I have not a person to send:
and his lordship will maybe be out on the hill, or he will have
forgotten, or maybe he wasna sure when to expect you, mem?"

"No, he did not know when to expect me. I hope there is no illness,"
said Mrs. Methven, with a thrill of apprehension.

At this the young lady came forward with a shy yet frank grace.

"If you will let me take you across," she said, "my boat is ready. I am
Oona Forrester. Lord Erradeen is quite well I think, and I heard that he
expected--his mother."

"Yes," said Mrs. Methven. She gave the young stranger a penetrating
look. Her own aspect was perhaps a little severe, for her heart had
been starved and repressed, and she wore it very warm and low down in
her bosom, never upon her sleeve. There rose over Oona's countenance a
soft and delicate flush under the eyes of Walter's mother. She had
nothing in the world to blush for, and probably that was why the colour
rose. They were of infinite interest to each other, two souls meeting,
as it were, in the dark, quite unknown to each other and yet--who could
tell?--to be very near perhaps in times to come. The look they
interchanged was a mutual question. Then Mrs. Methven felt herself bound
to take up her invariable defence of her son.

"He did not, most likely, think that I could arrive so soon. I was wrong
not to let him know. If I accept your kindness will it be an
inconvenience to you?"

This question was drowned in Oona's immediate response and in the louder
protest of Mrs. Macfarlane. "Bless me, mem, you canna know the loch! for
there is nobody but would put themselves about to help a traveller: and
above all Miss Oona, that just has no other thought. Colin, put in the
lady's box intill the boat, and Hamish, he will give ye a hand."

Thus it was settled without farther delay. It seemed to the elder lady
like a dream when she found herself afloat upon this unknown water, the
mountains standing round, with their heads all clear and pale in the
wonderful atmosphere from which the last rays of the sunset had but
lately faded, while down below in this twilight scene the colour had
begun to go out of the autumn trees and red walls of the ruined castle,
at which she looked with a curiosity full of excitement. "That is----?"
she said pointing with a strange sensation of eagerness.

"That is Kinloch Houran," said Oona, to whose sympathetic mind, she
could not tell how, there came a tender, pitying comprehension of the
feelings of the mother, thus thrust alone and without any guide into the
other life of her son.

"It is very strange to me--to see the place where Walter----You know
perhaps that neither my son nor I were ever here until he----"

"Oh yes," Oona said hastily, interrupting the embarrassed speech; and
she added, "My mother and I have been here always, and everybody on the
loch knows everybody else. We were aware----"

And then she paused too; but her companion took no notice, her mind
being fully occupied. "I feel," she said, "like a woman in a dream."

It was very still on the loch, scarcely a breath stirring (which was
very fortunate, for Mrs. Methven, unaccustomed, had a little tremor for
the dark water even though so smooth). The autumnal trees alone, not
quite put out by the falling darkness, seemed to lend a little light as
they hung, reflected, over the loch--a redder cluster here and there
looking like a fairy lamp below the water. A thousand suggestions were
in the air, and previsions of she knew not what, a hidden life
surrounding her on every side. Her brain was giddy, her heart full.
By-and-by she turned to her young companion, who was so sympathetically
silent, and whose soft voice when she spoke, with the little cadence of
an accent unfamiliar yet sweet, had a half-caressing sound which touched
the solitary woman. "You say your mother and you," she said. "Are you
too an only child?"

"Oh no! there are eight of us: but I am the youngest, the only one left.
All the boys are away. We live on the isle. I hope you will come and see
us. My mother will be glad----"

"And she is not afraid to trust you--by yourself? It must be a happy
thing for a woman to have a daughter," Mrs. Methven said, with a sigh.
"The boys, as you say, go away."

"Nobody here is afraid of the loch," said Oona. "Accidents happen--oh,
very rarely. Mamma is a little nervous about yachting, for the winds
come down from the hills in gusts; but Hamish is the steadiest oar, and
there is no fear. Do you see now the lights at Auchnasheen? There is
some one waiting, at the landing-place. It will be Lord Erradeen, or
some one from the house. Hamish, mind the current. You know how it
sweeps the boat up the loch?"

"It will just be the wash of that confounded steam-boat," Hamish said.

The voices bounded in the air without conveying any sense to her mind.
Was that Walter, the vague line of darker shadow upon the shade? Was it
his house she was going to, his life that she was entering once more?
All doubts were put to an end speedily by Walter's voice.

"Is it Hamish?" he cried out.

"Oh, Lord Erradeen, it is me," cried Oona, in her soft Scotch. "And I am
bringing you your mother."

The boat grated on the bank as she spoke, and this disguised the tremor
in her voice, which Mrs. Methven, quite incapable of distinguishing
anything else, was yet fully sensible of. She stepped out tremulously
into her son's arms.

"Mother," he cried, "what must you think of me for not coming to meet
you? I never thought you could be here so soon."

"I should have come by telegraph if I could," she said, with an agitated
laugh: so tired, so tremulous, so happy, the strangest combination of
feelings overwhelming her. But still she was aware of a something, a
tremor, a tingle in Oona's voice. The boat receded over the water almost
without a pause, Hamish under impulsion of a whispered word, having
pushed off again as soon as the traveller and her box were landed.
Walter paused to call out his thanks over the water, and then he drew
his mother's arm within his, and led her up the bank.

"Where is Jane?" he said. "Have you no one with you? Have you travelled
all night, and alone, mother, for me?"

"For whom should I do it, but for you? And did you think I would lose a
minute after your message, Walter? But you are well, there is nothing
wrong with your health?"

"Nothing wrong with my health," he said, with a half-laugh. "No, that is
safe enough. I have not deserved that you should come to me, mother----"

"There is no such word as deserving between mother and son," she said
tremulously, "so long as you want me, Walter."

"Take care of those steps," was all he said. "We are close now to the
house. I hope you will find your rooms comfortable. I fear they have not
been occupied for some time. But what shall you do without a maid?
Perhaps the housekeeper----"

"You said to come alone, Walter."

"Oh yes. I was afraid of Cousin Sophy; but you could not think I wanted
to impair your comfort, mother? Here we are at the door, and here is
Symington, very glad to receive his lady."

"But you must not let him call me so."

"Why not? You are our lady to all of us. You are the lady of the house,
and I bid you welcome to it, mother," he said, pausing to kiss her. She
had a thousand things to forgive, but in that moment they were as though
they had not been.

And there was not much more said until she had settled down into
possession of the library, which answered instead of a drawing-room: had
dined, and been brought back to the glowing peat fire which gave an
aromatic breath of warmth and character to a Highland house. When all
the business of the arrival had thus been gone through, there came a
moment when it was apparent that subjects of more importance must be
entered upon. There was a pause, and an interval of complete silence
which seemed much longer than it really was. Walter stood before the
fire for some time, while she sat close by, her hands clasped in her
lap, ready to attend. Then he began to move about uneasily, feeling the
compulsion of the moment, yet unprepared with anything to say. At length
it was she who began.

"You sent for me, Walter?" she said.

"Yes, mother."

Was there nothing more to tell her? He threw into disorder the books on
the table, and then he came back again, and once more faced her,
standing with his back to the fire.

"My dear," she said hesitating, "it is with no reproach I speak, but
only----There was some reason for sending for me?"

He gave once more a nervous laugh.

"You have good reason to be angry if you will; but I'll tell you the
truth, mother. I made use of you to get rid of Underwood. He followed me
here, and I told him you were coming, and that he could not stay
against the will of the mistress of the house. Then I was bound to ask
you----"

The poor lady drew back a little, and instinctively put her hand to her
heart, in which there was a hot thrill of sensation, as if an arrow had
gone in. And then, in the pang of it, she laughed too, and cried--

"You were bound, to be sure, to fulfil your threat. And this is
why--this is why, Walter----"

She could not say more without being hysterical, and departing from
every rule she had made for herself.

Meanwhile, Walter stood before her, feeling in his own heart the twang
of that arrow which had gone through hers, and the pity of it and wonder
of it, with a poignant realisation of all; and yet found nothing to say.

After a while Mrs. Methven regained her composure, and spoke with a
smile that was almost more pathetic than tears.

"After all, it was a very good reason. I am glad you used me to get rid
of that man."

"I always told you, mother," he said, "that you had a most absurd
prejudice against that man. There is no particular harm in the man. I
had got tired of him. He is well enough in his own way, but he was out
of place here."

"Well, Walter, we need not discuss Captain Underwood. But don't you see
it is natural that I should exaggerate his importance by way of giving
myself the better reason for having come?"

The touch of bitterness and sarcasm that was in her words made Walter
start from his place again, and once more turn over the books on the
table. She was not a perfect woman to dismiss all feeling from what she
said, and her heart was wrung.

After a while he returned to her again.

"Mother, I acknowledge you have a good right to be displeased. But that
is not all. I am glad, anyhow--heartily glad to have you here."

She looked up at him with her eyes full, and quivering lips. Everything
went by impulse in the young man's mind, and this look--in which for
once in his life he read the truth, the eagerness to forgive, the
willingness to forget, the possibility, even in the moment of her
deepest pain, of giving her happiness--went to his heart. After all it
is a wonderful thing to have a human creature thus altogether dependent
upon your words, your smile, ready to encounter all things for you,
without hesitation, without a grudge. And why should she? What had he
ever done for her? And she was no fool. These thoughts had already
passed through his mind with a realisation of the wonder of it all,
which seldom strikes the young at sight of the devotion of the old. All
these things flashed back upon him at the sight of the dumb anguish yet
forgiveness in her eyes.

"Mother," he cried, "there's enough of this between you and me. I want
you not for Underwood, but for everything. Why should you care for a cad
like me? but you do----"

"Care for you? Oh, my boy!"

"I know; there you sit that have travelled night and day because I held
up my finger: and would give me your life if you could, and bear
everything, and never change and never tire. Why, in the name of God,
why?" he cried with an outburst. "What have I ever done that you should
do this for me? You are worth a score of such as I am, and yet you make
yourself a slave--"

"Oh, Walter, my dear! how vain are all these words. I am your mother,"
she said.

Presently he drew a chair close to her and sat down beside her.

"All these things have been put before me," he said, "to drive me to
despair. I have tried to say that it was this vile lordship, and the
burden of the family, that has made me bad, mother. But you know better
than that," he said, looking up at her with a stormy gleam in his face
that could not be called a smile, "and so do I."

"Walter, God forbid that I should ever have thought you bad. You have
been led astray."

"To do--what I wanted to do," he said with another smile, "that is what
is called leading astray between a man and those who stand between him
and the devil; but I have talked with one who thinks of no such
punctilios. Mother, vice deserves damnation; isn't that your creed?"

"Walter!"

"Oh, I know; but listen to me. If that were so, would a woman like you
stand by the wretch still?"

"My dearest boy! you are talking wildly. There are no circumstances,
none! in which I should not stand by you."

"That is what I thought," he said, "you and--But they say that you don't
know, you women, how bad a man can be: and that if you knew--And then as
for God----"

"God knows everything, Walter."

"Ay: and knows that never in my life did I care for or appeal to Him,
till in despair. If you think of it, these are not things a man can do,
mother: take refuge with women who would loathe him if they knew; or
with God, who does know that only in desperation, only when nothing else
is left to him, he calls out that name like a spell. Yes, that is all;
like an incantation, to get rid of the fiend."

The veins were swollen on Walter's forehead; great drops of moisture
hung upon it; on the other hand his lips were parched and dry, his eyes
gleaming with a hot treacherous lustre. Mrs. Methven, as she looked at
him, grew sick with terror. She began to think that his brain was giving
way.

"What am I to say to you?" she cried; "who has been speaking so? It
cannot be a friend, Walter. That is not the way to bring back a soul."

He laughed, and the sound alarmed her still more.

"There was no friendship intended," he said, "nor reformation either.
It was intended--to make me a slave."

"To whom, oh! to whom?"

He had relieved his mind by talking thus; but it was by putting his
burden upon her. She was agitated beyond measure by these partial
confidences. She took his hands in hers, and pleaded with him--

"Oh, Walter, my darling, what has happened to you? Tell me what you
mean."

"I am not mad, mother, if that is what you think."

"I don't think so, Walter. I don't know what to think. Tell me. Oh, my
boy, have pity upon me; tell me."

"You will do me more good, mother, if you will tell me--how I am to get
this burden off, and be a free man."

"The burden of--what? Sin? Oh, my son!" she cried, rising to her feet,
with tears of joy streaming from her eyes. She put her hands upon his
head and bade God bless him. God bless him! "There is no doubt about
that; no difficulty about that," she said; "for everything else in the
world there may be uncertainty, but for this none. God is more ready to
forgive than we are to ask. If you wish it sincerely with all your
heart, it is done. He is never far from any of us. He is here,
Walter--here, ready to pardon!"

He took her hands which she had put upon him, and looked at her, shaking
his head.

"Mother, you are going too fast," he said. "I want deliverance, it is
true; but I don't know if it is _that_ I mean."

"That is at the bottom of all, Walter."

He put her softly into her chair, and calmed her agitation; then he
began to walk up and down the room.

"That is religion," he said. "I suppose it is at the bottom of all. What
was it you used to teach me, mother, about a new heart? Can a man enter
a second time--and be born? That seems all so visionary when one is
living one's life. You think of hundreds of expedients first. To thrust
it away from you, and forget all about it; but that does not answer; to
defy it and go the other way out of misery and spite. Then to try
compromises; marriage, for instance, with a wife perhaps, one
thinks----"

"My dear," said Mrs. Methven, with a sad sinking of disappointment in
her heart after her previous exultation, yet determined that her
sympathy should not fail, "if you had a good wife no one would be so
happy as I--a good girl who would help you to live a good life."

Here he came up to her again, and, leaning against the table, burst into
a laugh. But there was no mirth in it. A sense of the ludicrous is not
always mirthful.

"A girl," he said, "mother, who would bring another fortune to the
family: who would deluge us with money, and fill out the lines of the
estates, and make peace--peace between me and--And not a bad girl
either," he added with a softening tone, "far too good for me. An
honest, upright little soul, only not--the best; only not the one
who--would hate me if she knew----"

"Walter," said Mrs. Methven, trembling, "I don't understand you. Your
words seem very wild to me. I am all confused with them, and my brain
seems to be going. What is it you mean? Oh, if you would tell me all you
mean and not only a part which I cannot understand!"

There never happens in any house a conversation of a vital kind, which
is not interrupted at a critical moment by the entrance of the servants,
those legitimate intruders who can never be staved off. It was Symington
now who came in with tea, which, with a woman's natural desire to
prevent any suspicion of agitation in the family, she accepted. When he
had gone the whole atmosphere was changed. Walter had seated himself by
the fire with the newspapers which had just come in, and all the emotion
and _attendrissement_ were over. He said to her, looking up from his
reading--

"By-the-bye, mother, Julia Herbert is here with some cousins; they will
be sure to call on you. But I don't want to have any more to do with
them than we can help. You will manage that?"

"Julia Herbert," she said. The countenance which had melted into so much
softness, froze again and grew severe. "Here! why should she be here?
Indeed, I hope I shall be able to manage that, as you say."

But oh, what ignoble offices for a woman who would have given her life
for him as he knew! To frighten away Underwood, to "manage" Julia.
Patience! so long as it was for her boy.




CHAPTER VI.


On the next morning after his mother's arrival, Lord Erradeen set out
early for Birkenbraes. Everything pushed him towards a decision; even
her prompt arrival, which he had not anticipated, and the clearing away
from his path of the simpler and more easy difficulties that beset him,
by her means. But what was far more than this was the tug at his heart,
the necessity that lay before him to satisfy, one way or the other, the
demands of his tyrant. He could not send away that spiritual enemy, who
held him in his grip, as he did the vulgar influence of Underwood.
_That_ had disgusted him almost from the first; he had never tolerated
it, even when he yielded to it; and the effort he had made in throwing
it over had been exhilarating to him, and gave a certain satisfaction to
his mind. But now that was over, and he had returned again to the
original question, and found himself once more confronted by that
opponent who could not be shaken off--who, one way or other, must be
satisfied or vanquished, if life were to be possible. Vanquished? How
was he to be vanquished?--by a pure man and a strong--by a pure woman
and her love--by the help of God against a spiritual tyranny. He smiled
to himself as he hurried along the road, thinking of the hopelessness of
all this--himself neither pure nor strong; and Oona, who, if she
knew--and God, whom, as his tempter had said, he had never sought nor
thought of till now. He hurried along to try if the second best was
within his reach; perhaps even that might fail him for anything he knew.
The thought of meeting the usual party in the house of the Williamsons
was so abhorrent to him, and such a disgust had risen in his mind of all
the cheerful circumstances of the big, shining house, that he set out
early with the intention of formally seeking an interview with Katie,
and thus committing himself from the beginning. The morning was bright
and fair, with a little shrill wind about, which brought the yellow
leaves fluttering to his feet, and carried them across him as he
walked--now detached and solitary, now in little drifts and heaps. He
hurried along, absorbed in his own thoughts, shutting his eyes to the
vision of the isle, as it lay all golden, russet, and brown upon the
surface of the water which gave its colours back; Walter would not look
nor see the boat pushing round the corner, with the back of Hamish's red
shirt alone showing, as the prow came beyond the shade of the trees. He
did not see the boat, and yet he knew it was there, and hurried, hurried
on to escape all reminders. The great door at Birkenbraes stood open, as
was its wont--the great stone steps lying vacant in the sunshine, and
everything still about. It was the only hour at which the place was
quiet. The men were out on the hill, the ladies following such rational
occupations as they might have to resort to, and the house had an air of
relief and repose. Walter felt that he pronounced his own fate when he
asked to see Miss Williamson.

"Mr. Williamson is out, my lord," the solemn functionary said, who was
far more important and dignified than the master of the house. "I asked
to see Miss Williamson," Lord Erradeen repeated, with a little
impatience; and he saw the man's eyebrows raised.

So far as the servants were concerned, and through them the whole
district, Walter's "intentions" stood revealed.

Katie Williamson was alone. She was in her favourite room--the room
especially given over to her amusements and occupations. It was not a
small room, for such a thing scarcely existed in Birkenbraes. It was
full of windows, great expanses of plate glass, through which the
mountains and the loch appeared uninterrupted, save by a line of
framework here and there, with a curious open-air effect. It was in one
of the corners of the house, and the windows formed two sides of the
brilliant place; on the others were mirrors reflecting the mountains
back again. She sat between them, her little fair head the only solid
thing which the light encountered. When she rose, with a somewhat
astonished air, to receive her visitor, her trim figure, neat and alert,
stood out against the background of the trees and rocks on the lower
slopes of the hills. A curious transparency, distinctness, and absence
of privacy and mystery were in the scene. The two seemed to stand
together there in the sight of all the world.

"Lord Erradeen!" Katie said, with surprise, almost consternation. "But
if I had been told, I should have come down-stairs to you. Nobody but my
great friends, nobody but women, ever come here."

"I should have thought that any one might come. There are no
concealments here," he said, expressing the sentiment of the place
unconsciously. Then, seeing that Katie's colour rose: "Your boudoir is
not all curtained and shadowy, but open and candid--as you are."

"That last has saved you," said Katie, with a laugh. "I know what you
mean--and that is that my room (for it is not a boudoir--I never
_boude_) is far too light, too clear for the fashion. But this is my
fashion, and people who come to me must put up with it." She added,
after a moment: "What did you say to Sanderson, Lord Erradeen, to induce
him to bring you here?"

"I said I wanted to see Miss Williamson."

"That was understood," said Katie, once more with an increase of colour,
and looking at him with a suppressed question in her eyes. Her heart
gave a distinct knock against her breast, but did not jump up and
flutter, as hearts less well regulated will do in such circumstances;
for she too perceived what Sanderson had perceived, that the interview
was not one to take place amid all the interruptions of the
drawing-room. Sanderson was a very clever person, and his young
mistress agreed with him; but, nevertheless, made a private memorandum
that he should have notice, and that she would speak to papa.

"Yes, I think it must be easily understood. I have come to you with a
great deal that is very serious to say."

"You look very serious," said Katie; and then she added, hurriedly, "And
I want very much to speak to you, Lord Erradeen. I want you to tell
me--who was that gentleman at Kinloch Houran? I have never been able to
get him out of my mind. Is he paying you a visit? What is his name? Has
he been in this country before? But oh, to be sure, he must have been,
for he knew everything about the castle. I want to know, Lord
Erradeen----"

"After you have heard what I have got to say----"

"No, not after--before. I tremble when I think of him. It is ridiculous,
I know; but I never had any such sensation before. I should think he
must be a mesmerist, or something of that sort," Katie said, with a pale
and nervous smile; "though I don't believe in mesmerism," she added,
quickly.

"You believe in nothing of the kind--is it not so? You put no faith in
the stories about my family, in the influence of the past on the
present, in the despotism--But why say anything on that subject. You
laugh."

"I believe in superstition," said Katie somewhat tremulously, "and that
it impresses the imagination, and puts you in a condition to
believe--things. And then there is a pride in having anything of the
sort connected with one's own family," she said recovering herself. "If
it was our ghost I should believe in it too."

"Ghost--is not a word that means much?" Walter said. And then there was
a pause. It seemed to him that his lips were sealed, and that he had no
longer command of the ordinary words. He had known what he had meant to
say when he came, but the power seemed to have gone from him. He stood
and looked out upon the wide atmosphere, and the freedom of the hills,
with a blank in his mind, and that sense that nothing is any longer of
importance or meaning which comes to those who are baffled in their
purpose at the outset. It was Katie who with a certain sarcasm in her
tone recalled him to himself. "You came--because you had something
serious to say to me, Lord Erradeen." She was aware of what he intended
to say; but his sudden pause at the very beginning had raised the
mocking spirit in Katie. She was ready to defy and provoke, and silence
with ridicule, the man whom she had no objection to accept as her
husband--provided he found his voice.

"It is true--I had something very serious to say. I came to ask you
whether you could--" All this time he was not so much as looking at her;
his eyes were fixed dreamily and rather sadly upon the landscape, which
somehow seemed so much more important than the speck of small humanity
which he ought to have been addressing. But at this point Walter
recollected himself, and came in as it were from the big, silent,
observing world, to Katie, sitting expectant, divided between mockery
and excitement, with a flush on her cheeks, but a contraction of her
brows, and an angry yet smiling mischief in her eyes.

"To ask you," he said, "whether you would--pass your life with me. I am
not much worth the taking. There is a poor title, there is a family
which we might restore and--emancipate perhaps. You are rich, it would
be of no advantage to you. But at all events it would not be like asking
you to banish yourself, to leave all you cared for. I have little to say
for myself," he went on after a pause with a little more energy, "you
know me well enough. Whether I should ever be good for anything
would--most likely--rest with you. I am at present under great
depression--in trouble and fear--"

Here he came to another pause, and looked out upon the silent mountains
and great breadths of vacant air in which there was nothing to help:
then with a sigh turned again and held out his hand. "Will you have
me--Katie?" he said.

Katie sat gazing at him with a wonder which had by degrees extinguished
the sarcasm, the excitement, the expectation, that were in her face. She
was almost awestricken by this strangest of all suits that could be
addressed to a girl--a demand for herself which made no account of
herself, and missed out love and every usual preliminary. It was serious
indeed--as serious as death: more like that than the beginning of the
most living of all links. She could not answer him with the indignation
which in other circumstances she might have felt. It was too solemn for
any ebullition of feeling. She felt overawed, little as this mood was
congenial to her.

"Lord Erradeen," she said, "you seem to be in great trouble."

He made an affirmative movement of his head, but said no more.

"--Or you would not put such a strange question to me," she went on.
"Why should I have you? When a man offers himself to a girl he says it
is because he loves her. You don't love me--"

She made a momentary breathless pause with a half-hope of being
interrupted; but save by a motion of his hand, Walter made no sign. "You
don't love me," she went on with some vehemence, "nor do you ask me to
love you. Such a proposal might be an insult. But I don't think you mean
it as an insult."

"Not that. You know better. Anything but that!"

"No--I don't think it is that. But what is it then, Lord Erradeen?"

Her tone had a certain peremptory sound which touched the capricious
spring by which the young man's movements were regulated. He came to
himself. "Miss Williamson," he said, "when you ran away from me in
London it was imminent that I should ask you this question. It was
expected on all sides. You went away, I have always believed, to avoid
it."

"Why should it have been imminent? I went away," cried Katie, forgetting
the contradiction, "because some one came in who seemed to have a prior
right. She is here now with the same meaning."

"She has no prior right. She has no right at all, nor does she claim
any," he said hurriedly. "It is accident. Katie! had you stayed, all
would have been determined then, and one leaf of bitter folly left out
of my life."

"Supposing it to be so," she said calmly, "I am not responsible for your
life, Lord Erradeen. Why should I be asked to step in and save you
from--bitter folly or anything else? And this life that you offer me,
are you sure it is fit for an honest girl to take? The old idea that a
woman should be sacrificed to reform a man has gone out of fashion. Is
that the _rôle_ you want me to take up?" Katie cried, rising to her feet
in her excitement. "Captain Underwood (whose word I would never take)
said you were bad, unworthy a good woman. Is that true?"

"Yes," he said in a low tone, "it is true."

Katie gazed at him for a moment, and then in her excitement sat down and
cried, covering her face with her hands. She it was, though she was not
emotional, who was overcome with feeling. Walter stood gazing at her
with a sort of stupefaction, seeing the scene pass with a sense that he
was a spectator rather than an actor in it, his dark figure swaying
slightly against the clearness of the landscape which took so strange a
part in all that was happening. It had passed now altogether out of his
hands.

As for Katie, it would be impossible to tell what sudden softening, what
pity, mingled with keen vexation and annoyance, forced these tears from
her eyes. Her heart revolted against him and melted towards him all at
once. Her pride would not let her accept such a proposal; and yet she
would have liked to accept him, to take him in hand, to be his
providence, and the moulder of his fate. A host of hurrying thoughts and
sentiments rushed headlong through her mind. She had it in her to do it,
better than any silly woman of the world, better than a creature of
visionary soul like Oona. She was practical, she was strong, she could
do it. But then all her pride rose up in arms. She wept a few hot
impatient tears which were irrestrainable: then raised her head again.

"I am very sorry for you," she said. "If you were my brother, Lord
Erradeen, I would help you with all my might, or if I--cared for you
more than you care for me. But I don't," she added after a pause.

He made an appealing, deprecating movement with his hands, but did not
speak.

"I almost wish I did," said Katie regretfully; "if I had been fond of
you I should have said yes: for you are right in thinking I could do it.
I should not have minded what went before. I should have taken you up
and helped you on. I know that I could have done it; but then I am
not--fond of you," she said slowly. She did not look at him as she
spoke; but had he renewed his claim upon her, even with his eyes, Katie
would have seen it, and might have allowed herself to be persuaded
still. But Walter said nothing. He stood vaguely in the light, without a
movement, accepting whatever she might choose to say. She remained
silent for a time, waiting. And then Katie sprang to her feet again, all
the more indignant and impatient that she had been so near yielding, had
he but known. "Well!" she said, "is it I that am to maintain the
conversation? Have you anything more to say, Lord Erradeen?"

"I suppose not," he answered slowly. "I came to you hoping perhaps for
deliverance, at least partial--for deliverance--Now that you will not,
there is nothing for it but a struggle to the death."

She looked at him with a sort of vertigo of amazement. Not a word about
her, no regret for losing her, not a touch of sentiment, of gratitude,
not even any notice of what she had said! The sensation of awe came back
to her as she stood before this insensibility which was half sublime.
Was he mad? or a wretch, an egotist, wanting a woman to do something for
him, but without a thought for the woman?

"I am glad," she said, with irrepressible displeasure, "that it affects
you so little. And now I suppose the incident is over and we may return
to our occupations. I was busy--with my housekeeping," she said with a
laugh. "One might sometimes call a struggle with one's bills a struggle
to the death."

He gave her a look which was half-anger, half-remonstrance; and then to
Katie's amazement resumed in a moment the tone of easy intercourse which
had always existed between them.

"You will find your bills refreshing after this highflown talk," he
said. "Forgive me. You know I am not given to romantic sentiment any
more than yourself."

"I don't know," said Katie, offended, "that I am less open to the
romantic than other people when the right touch is given."

"But it is not my hand that can give the right touch?" he said. "I
accept my answer as there is nothing else for me to do. But I cannot
abandon the country," he added after a moment, "and I hope we may still
meet as good friends."

"Nothing has happened," said Katie with dignity, "to lessen my
friendship for you, Lord Erradeen." She could not help putting a faint
emphasis on the pronouns. The man rejected may dislike to meet the woman
who has rejected him, but the woman can have no feeling in the matter.
She held out her hand with a certain stateliness of dismissal. "Papa
need not know," she said, "and so there will be nothing more about it.
Good-bye."

Walter took her hand in his, with a momentary perception that perhaps
there had been more than lay on the surface in this interview, on her
side as well as his. He stooped down and kissed it respectfully, and
even with something like tenderness. "You do not refuse it to me, in
friendship, even after all you have heard?"

"It shall always be yours in friendship," Katie said, the colour rising
high in her face.

She was glad he went away without looking at her again. She sat down and
listened to his footsteps along the long corridor and down the stairs
with a curious sensation as if he carried something with him that would
not return to her again. And for long after she sat in the broad
daylight without moving, leaving the books upon the table--which were
not housekeeping books--untouched--going over this strange interview,
turning over all the past that had any connection with Lord Erradeen. It
seemed all to roll out before her like a story that had been full of
interest: and now here was the end of it. Such a fit of wistful sadness
had seldom come over the active and practical intelligence of Katie. It
gave her for the moment a new opening in nature. But by degrees her
proper moods came back. She closed this poetical chapter with a sigh,
and her sound mind took up with a more natural regret the opportunity
for congenial effort which she had been compelled to give up. She said
to herself that she would not have minded that vague badness which he
had owned, and Underwood had accused him of. She could have brought him
back. She had it in her to take the charge even of a man's life. So she
thought in inexperience, yet with the powerful confidence which so often
is the best means of fulfilling triumphantly what it aims at. She would
not have shrunk from the endeavour. She would have put her vigorous
young will into his feeble one, she thought, and made him, with her
force poured into him, a man indeed, contemptuous of all miserable
temptations, able to sail over and despise them. As she mused her eyes
took an eager look, her very fingers twitched with the wish to be doing.
Had he come back then it is very possible that Katie would have
announced to him her change of mind, her determination "to pull him
through." For she could have done it! she repeated to herself. Whatever
his burdens had been, when she had once set her shoulder to the wheel
she would have done it. Gambling, wine, even the spells of such women as
Katie blushed to think of--she would have shrunk before none of these.
His deliverance would not have been partial, as he had said, but
complete. She would have fought the very devils for him and brought him
off. What a work it was that she had missed! not a mere commonplace
marriage with nothing to do. But with a sigh Katie had to acknowledge
that it was over. She could not have accepted him, she said, excusing
herself to herself. It would have been impossible. A man who asks you
like _that_, not even pretending to care for you--you could not do it!
But, alas! what an opportunity lost! Saying this she gave herself a
shake, and smoothed her hair for luncheon, and put the thought away from
her resolutely. Katie thought of Dante's nameless sinner who made "the
great refusal." She had lost perhaps the one great opportunity of her
life.




CHAPTER VII.


Lord Erradeen retired very quietly, as became a man defeated. Though
Katie heard his retiring steps, he hardly did so himself, as he came
down the broad softly-carpeted stair-case. There was a sound of voices
and of movement in the great dining-room, where a liveried army were
preparing the table for one of the great luncheons, under the orders of
the too discreet and understanding Sanderson--but nobody about to see
the exit of the rejected suitor, who came out into the sunshine with a
sort of dim recognition of the scenery of Katie's boudoir; but the hills
did not seem so near as they were in that large-windowed and shining
place. Failure has always a subduing effect upon the mind even when
success was scarcely desired; and Walter came out of the great house
with the sense of being cut off from possibilities that seemed very
near, almost certain, that morning. This subduing influence was the
first that occupied his mind as he came out, feeling as if he were
stealing away from the scene of what had been far from a triumph.
Perhaps he was a little ashamed of his own certainty; but at all events
he was subdued and silent, refraining almost from thought.

He had got securely out of the immediate neighbourhood, and was safe
from the risk of meeting any one belonging to it, and being questioned
where he had been, before he began to feel the softening of relief, and
a grateful sense of freedom. Then his heart recurred with a bound to the
former situation. Expedients or compromises of any kind were no more to
be thought of; the battle must be fought out on its natural ground. He
must yield to the ignominious yoke, or he must conquer. Last year he had
fled, and forced himself to forget, and lived in a fever of impulses
which he could not understand, and influences which drew him like--he
could not tell like what--mesmerism, Katie had said, and perhaps she was
right. It might be mesmerism; or it might be only the action of that
uncontrolled and capricious mind which made him do that to-day which he
loathed to-morrow. But however it was, the question had again become a
primary one, without any compromise possible. He must yield, or he must
win the battle. He put the losing first, it seemed so much the most
likely, with a dreary sense of all the impossibilities that surrounded
him. He had no standing ground upon which to meet his spiritual foe.
Refusal, what was that? It filled his life with distraction and
confusion, but made no foundation for anything better, and afforded no
hope of peace. Peace! The very word seemed a mockery to Walter. He must
never know what it was. His soul (if he had one) would not be his own;
his impulses, hitherto followed so foolishly, would be impotent for
everything but to follow the will of another. To abdicate his own
judgment altogether, to give up that power of deciding for himself which
is the inheritance of the poorest, never to be able to help a poor
neighbour, to aid a friend: to be a mere puppet in the hands of
another--was it possible that he, a man, was to give himself up, thus
bound hand and foot, to a slavery harder than that of any negro ever
born? It was this that was impossible he cried within himself.

And then there suddenly came before Walter, like a vision set before him
by the angels, a gleam of the one way of escape. When a poor wretch has
fallen into a pit, a disused quarry, perhaps, or an old coal-pit, or a
still more eerie dungeon, there shines over him, far off, yet so
authentic, a pure, clear intensity of light above, a concentrated glory
of the day, a sort of opening of heaven in his sight. This is the spot
of light, more beautiful than any star, which is all that the walls of
his prison permit him to see of the common day, which above-ground is
lavished around us in such a prodigal way that we make no account of it.
There are times when the common virtues of life, the common calm and
peacefulness, take an aspect like this to the fallen soul:--the simple
goodness which, perhaps, he has scoffed at and found tame and
unprofitable, appearing to the spirit in prison like heaven itself, so
serene and so secure. To think he himself has fallen from that, might
have possessed and dwelt in it, safe from all censure and dishonour, if
he had not been a fool! To think that all the penalties to which he has
exposed himself might never have existed at all--if he had not been a
fool! To think that now if some miracle would but raise him up to
it--And then there are moments in which even the most vicious, the most
utterly fallen, can feel as if no great miracle would be required, as if
a little help, only a little, would do it--when strength is subdued and
low, when the sense of dissatisfaction is strong, and all the impulses
of the flesh in abeyance, as happens at times. Walter's mind came
suddenly to this conviction as he walked and mused. A good life, a pure
heart, these were the things which would overcome--better, far better
than any gain, than any sop given to fate; and he felt that all his
desires went up towards these, and that there was nothing in him but
protested against the degradation of the past. He had, he said to
himself, never been satisfied, never been but disgusted with the riot
and so-called pleasure. While he indulged in them he had loathed them,
sinning contemptuously with a bitter scorn of himself and of the
indulgences which he professed to find sweet.

Strange paradox of a soul! which perceived the foulness of the ruin into
which it had sunk, and hated it, yet sank deeper and deeper all the
while. And now how willing he was to turn his back upon it all, and how
easy it seemed to rise with a leap to the higher level and be done with
everything that was past! The common goodness of the simple people about
seemed suddenly to him like a paradise in which was all that was lovely.
To live among your own, to do them good, to be loved and honoured, to
have a history pure and of good report, nothing in it to give you a
blush; to love a pure and good woman, and have her for your companion
all your life--how easy, how simple, how safe it was! And what tyrant
out of the unseen could rule a man like this, or disturb his quiet
mastery of himself and all that belonged to him? Once upon that standing
ground and who could assail you? And it seemed at that moment so easy
and so near. Everything round was wholesome, invigorating, clear with
the keen purity of nature, fresh winds blowing in his face, air the
purest and clearest, inspiring body and soul, not a lurking shade of
temptation anywhere, everything tending to goodness, nothing to evil.

"And you think these pettifogging little virtues will deliver _you_,"
said some one quietly by his side.

There were two figures walking along in the wintry sunshine instead of
one--that was all. The stone-cutter on the road who had seen Lord
Erradeen pass and given him a good morning, rubbed his eyes when next he
paused to rest and looked along the road. He saw two gentlemen where but
one had been, though it was still so early and "no a drap" had crossed
his lips. "And a pretty man!" he said to himself with mingled amazement
and admiration. As for Walter, it was with an instinctive recoil that
he heard the voice so near to him, but that not because of any
supernatural sensation, though with an annoyance and impatience
inexpressible that any one should be able to intrude on his privacy and
thus fathom his thoughts.

"This is scarcely an honourable advantage you take of your powers."

The other took no notice of this reproach. "A good man," he said, "a
good husband, a good member of society, surrounded by comfort on all
sides and the approbation of the world. I admire the character as much
as you do. Shall I tell you what this good man is? He is the best
rewarded of all the sons of men. Everything smiles upon him: he has the
best of life. Everything he does counts in his favour. And you think
that such a man can stand against a purpose like mine? But for that he
would want a stronger purpose than mine. Goodness," he continued
reflectively, "is the best policy in the world. It never fails. Craft
may fail, and skill and even wisdom, and the finest calculations; but
the good always get their reward. A prize falls occasionally to the
other qualities, but theirs is the harvest of life. To be successful you
have only to be good. It is far the safest form of self-seeking, and the
best." He had fallen into a reflective tone, and walked along with a
slight smile upon his lips, delivering with a sort of abstract authority
his monologue, while Walter, with an indescribable rage and
mortification and confusion of all his thoughts, accompanied him like a
schoolboy overpowered by an authority against which his very soul was
rebel. Then the speaker turned upon his companion with a sort of
benevolent cordiality. "Be good!" he said. "I advise it--it is the
easiest course you can pursue: you will free yourself from by far the
worst part of the evils common to humanity. Nothing is so bad as the
self-contempt under which I have seen you labouring, the shame of vice
for which you have no true instinct, only a sham appetite invented by
the contradictoriness of your own mind. Be good! it pays better than
anything else in life."

Here Walter interrupted him with an exclamation of anger irrestrainable.
"Stop!" he cried, "you have tortured me by my sins, and because I had
nothing better to fall back upon. Will you make this more odious still?"

"By no means," said the other, calmly. "You think I want you to be
miserable? You are mistaken--I don't. Seeking the advantage of my race
as I do, there is nothing I more desire than that you should have the
credit of a spotless life. I love reputation. Be good! it is the most
profitable of all courses. I repeat that whatever may fail that never
does. Your error is to think that it will free you from me. So far as
concerns me it would probably do you more injury than good; for it may
well be that I shall have to enforce measures which will revolt you and
make you unhappy. But then you will have compensations. The world will
believe that only bad advisers or mistaken views could move so good a
man to appear on occasions a hard landlord, a tyrannical master. And
then your virtue will come in with expedients to modify the secondary
effect of my plans and soften suffering. I do not desire suffering. It
will be in every way to our advantage that you should smooth down and
soften and pour balm into the wounds which in the pursuit of a higher
purpose it is necessary to make. Do not interrupt: it is the _rôle_ I
should have recommended to you, if, instead of flying out like a fool,
you had left yourself from the first in my hands."

"I think you must be the devil," Walter said.

"No; nor even of his kind: that is another mistake. I have no pleasure
in evil any more than in suffering, unless my object makes it necessary.
I should like you to do well. It was I, was it not, that set before you
the miserableness of the life you have been leading? which you had never
faced before. Can you suppose that I should wish greatness to the race
and misfortune to its individual members? Certainly not. I wish you to
do well. You could have done so, and lived very creditably with the girl
whom you have just left, whom you have driven into refusing you. Take my
advice--return to her, and all will be well."

"You have a right to despise me," said Walter, quivering with passion
and self-restraint. "I did take your advice, and outraged her and
myself. But that is over, and I shall take your advice no more."

"You are a fool for your pains," he said. "Go back now and you will find
her mind changed. She has thought it over. What! you will not? I said it
in your interest, it was your best chance. You could have taken up that
good life which I recommend to you with all the more success had there
been a boundless purse to begin upon. Poor it is not so easy: but still
you can try. Your predecessor was of that kind. There was nothing in him
that was bad, poor fellow. He was an agglomeration of small virtues.
Underwood was his one vice, a fellow who played cards with him and
amused him. No one, you will find, has anything to say against him; he
was thought weak, and so he was--against me. But that did not hinder him
from being good."

"In the name of Heaven what do you call yourself, that can speak of good
and evil as if they were red and blue!" the young man cried. Passion
cannot keep always at a climax. Walter's mind ranged from high
indignation, rage, dismay, to a wonder that was almost impersonal, which
sometimes reached the intolerable point, and burst out into impatient
words. It seemed impossible to endure the calm of him, the reason of
him, as he walked along the hilly road like any other man.

"It is not amiss for a comparison," he answered with a smile. His
composure was not to be disturbed. He made no further explanations.
While he played upon the young man beside him as on an instrument, he
himself remained absolutely calm. "But these are abstractions," he
resumed, "very important to you in your individual life, not so
important to me who have larger affairs in hand. There is something
however which will have to be decided almost immediately about the
island property. I told you that small business about the cotters in the
glen was a bagatelle. On the whole, though I thought it folly at the
time, your action in the matter was serviceable. A burst of generosity
has a fine effect. It is an example of what I have been saying. It
throws dust in the eyes of the world. Now we can proceed with vigour on
a larger scale."

"If you mean to injure the poor tenants, never! and whatever you mean,
no," cried Walter, "I will not obey you. Claim your rights, if you have
any rights, publicly."

"I will not take that trouble. I will enforce them through my
descendant."

"No! you can torture me, I am aware, but something I have learned since
last year."

"You have learned," said his companion calmly, "that your theatrical
benevolence was not an unmixed good, that your _protégés_ whom you kept
to that barren glen would have been better off had they been dislodged
cruelly from their holes. The question in its larger forms is not to be
settled from that primitive point of view. I allow," he said with a
smile, "that on the whole that was well done. It leaves us much more
free for operations now. It gives a good impression--a man who in spite
of his kind heart feels compelled to carry out--"

"You are a demon," cried the young man, stung beyond endurance. "You
make even justice a matter of calculation, even the natural horror of
one's mind. A kind heart! is that like a spade, an instrument in your
hands?"

"The comparison is good again," said his companion with a laugh; "your
faculty that way is improving. But we must have no trifling about the
matter in hand. The factor from the isles is not a fool like this fellow
here, whom I tolerate because he has his uses too. The other will come
to you presently, he will lay before you--"

"I will not hear him--once for all I refuse--"

"What, to receive your own servant?" said the other. "Come, this is
carrying things too far. You must hear, and see, and consent. There is
no alternative, except--"

"Except--if it comes to that, what can you do to me?" asked Walter,
ghastly with that rending of the spirit which had once more begun within
him, and with the host of fierce suggestions that surged into his mind.
He felt as men feel when they are going mad, when the wild intolerance
of all conditions which is the root of insanity mounts higher and higher
in the brain--when there is nothing that can be endured, nothing
supportable, and the impulse to destroy and ravage, to uproot trees and
beat down mountains, to lay violent hands upon something, sweeps like a
fiery blast across the soul. Even in madness there is always a certain
self-restraint. He knew that it would be vain to seize the strong and
tranquil man who stood before him, distorting everything in heaven and
earth with his calm consistency: therefore in all the maddening rush of
impulse _that_ did not suggest itself. "What can you do to me?" How
unnecessary was the question! What he could do was sensible in every
point, in the torrent of excitement that almost blinded, almost deafened
the miserable young man. He saw his enemy's countenance as through a
mist, a serene and almost beautiful face--looking at him with a sort of
benevolent philosophical pity which quickened the flood of passion. His
own voice was stifled in his throat, he could say no more. Nor could he
hear for the ringing in his ears, what more his adversary was saying to
him--something wildly incoherent he thought, about Prospero, Prospero!
"Do you think I am Prospero to send you aches and stitches?" The words
seemed to circle about him in the air, half mockery, half folly. What
had that to do with it? He walked along mechanically, rapt in an
atmosphere of his own, beating the air like a drowning man.

How long this horror lasted he could never tell. While still those
incomprehensible syllables were wavering about him, another voice
suddenly made itself heard, a touch came upon his arm. He gave a
violent start, recoiling from the touch, not knowing what it was. By
degrees, however, as the giddiness went off, he began to see again, to
perceive slowly coming into sight those mountains that had formed the
background in Katie's room, and to hear the soft wash of the waters upon
the beach. He found himself standing close to the loch, far below the
road upon which he had been walking. Had he rushed down to throw himself
into the water, and thus end the terrible conflict? He could never tell.
Or whether it was some angel that had arrested the terrible impulse.
When the mist dispersed from his eyes he saw this angel in a red shirt
standing close to him, looking at him with eyes that peered out beneath
the contraction of a pair of shaggy sandy eyebrows, from an honest
freckled face. "My lord! you'll maybe no have seen Miss Oona?" Hamish
said. And Walter heard himself burst into a wild laugh that seemed to
fill the whole silent world with echoes. He caught hold of the boatman's
arm with a grasp that made even Hamish shrink. "Who sent you here?" he
cried; "who sent you here? Do you come from God?" He did not know what
he said.

"My lord! you mustna take that name in vain. I'm thinking the Almighty
has a hand in maist things, and maybe it was just straight from Him I've
come, though I had no suspicion o' that," Hamish said. He thought for
the first moment it was a madman with whom he had to do. Walter had
appeared with a rush down the steep bank, falling like some one out of
the skies, scattering the pebbles on the beach, and Hamish had employed
Oona's name in the stress of the moment as something to conjure with. He
was deeply alarmed still as he felt the quiver in the young man's frame,
which communicated itself to Hamish's sturdy arm. Madness frightens the
most stout-hearted. Hamish was brave enough, as brave as a Highlander
need be, but he was half alarmed for himself, and much more for Oona,
who might appear at any moment. "I'll just be waiting about and nothing
particular to do," he said in a soothing tone; "if ye'll get into the
boat, my lord, I'll just put your lordship hame. Na, it's nae trouble,
nae trouble." Hamish did not like the situation; but he would rather
have rowed twenty maniacs than put Oona within reach of any risk. He
took Lord Erradeen by the elbow and directed him towards the boat,
repeating the kindly invitation of his country--"Come away, just come
away; I've naething particular to do, and it will just be a pleasure."

"Hamish," said Walter, "you think I am out of my mind: but you are
mistaken, my good fellow. _I_ think you have saved my life, and I will
not forget it. What was that you said about Miss Oona?"

Hamish looked earnestly into the young man's face.

"My lord," he began with hesitation, "you see--if a young gentleman is a
thocht out of the way, and just maybe excited about something and no
altogether his ain man--what's that to the like of me? Never a hair o'
hairm would that do to Hamish. But when it's a leddy, and young and real
tender-hearted! We maun aye think o' them, my lord, and spare them--the
weemen. No, it's what we dinna do--they have the warst in a general way
to bear. But atween you and me, my lord, that though you're far my
shuperior, are just man and man----"

"It is you that are my superior, Hamish," said Lord Erradeen; "but look
at me now and say if you think I am mad. You have saved me. I am fit to
speak to her now. Do you think I would harm her? Not for anything in the
world."

"No if you were--yoursel'--Lord Erradeen."

"But I am--myself. And the moment has come when I must know. Take my
hand, Hamish; look at me. Do you think I am not to be trusted with
Oona?"

"My lord, to make Hamish your judge, what's that but daft too? And what
right have ye to call my young leddy by her name? You're no a drap's
blood to them, nor even a great friend."

Oona's faithful guardian stood lowering his brows upon the young lord
with a mingled sense of the superiority of his office, and of
disapproval, almost contemptuous, of the madman who had given it to him.
That he should make Hamish the judge was mad indeed. And yet Hamish was
the judge, standing on his right to defend his mistress. They stood
looking at each other, the boatman holding his shaggy head high,
reading the other's face with the keenest scrutiny. But just then there
came a soft sound into the air, a call from the bank, clear, with that
tone, not loud but penetrating, which mountaineers use everywhere.

"Are you there, Hamish?" Oona cried.




CHAPTER VIII.


Oona's mind had been much disturbed, yet in no painful way, by the
meeting with Mrs. Methven. The service which she had done to Walter's
mother, the contact with her, although almost in the dark, the sense of
approach to another woman whose mind was full of anxiety and thought for
him, agitated her, yet seemed to heal and soften away the pain which
other encounters had given her. It gave her pleasure to think of the
half-seen face, made softer by the twilight, and of the tremor of
expectation and anxiety that had been in it. There was somehow in this a
kind of excuse to herself for her involuntary preoccupation with all
that concerned him. She had felt that there was an unspoken sympathy
between her and the stranger, and that it was something more than chance
which brought them together. As the boat pushed off into the loch, and
she felt she had left the mother to a certain happiness in her son, her
heart beat with a subdued excitement. She felt with them both, divining
the soul of the mother who came to him with trembling, not approving
perhaps, not fully trusting, but loving; and of the son who was at
fault, who had not shown her the tenderness which her love merited in
return. The sense of that union so incomplete in fact, and so close in
nature, filled Oona with emotion. As the boat glided along the
glittering pathway of the lake between the reflected banks, her mind was
full of the two who had gone away together arm and arm into the soft
darkness. How mysterious was that twilight world, the eye incapable in
the dimness of perceiving which was the substance and which the shadow
of those floating woods and islands! Sometimes the boat would glide into
the tangled reflections of the trees, sometimes strike through what
seemed a headland, a wall of rock, a long projecting promontory in this
little world of water, where nothing was as it seemed. But it was not
half so mysterious as life. It was but lately that this aspect of
existence had struck the healthful soul of the Highland girl. Till the
last year all had been open and sweet as the day about her ways and
thoughts. If she had any secrets at all they had been those which even
the angels guard between themselves and God, those sacred enthusiasms
for the one Love that is above all: those aspirations towards the
infinite which are the higher breath of gentle souls; or perhaps a
visionary opening into the romance of life in its present form, which
was scarcely less visionary and pure. But nothing else, nothing more
worldly, nothing that her namesake, "heavenly Una with her milkwhite
lamb," need have hesitated to avow.

But since then Oona had gone far and wandered wide in a shadowy world
which she shared with no one, and in which there were mystic forces
beyond her fathoming, influences which caught the wanderer all
unwitting, and drew her hither or thither unawares, against her will.
She was no longer the princess and sovereign of life as she had been in
the earlier portion of it, but rather its subject or possible victim,
moved by powers which she could not understand nor resist, and which
overcame her before she was aware of their existence. She thought of all
this as her boat made its way, propelled by the long, strong strokes of
Hamish, amid the shadows; but not angrily, not miserably as she had
sometimes done, with a sadness which (if it was sadness at all) was
sweet, and a secret exhilaration for which she could not account. The
mother seemed somehow to step into the visionary conflict which was
going on, a half-seen, unknown, but powerful champion on the side
of----Was it on the side of Oona? She shrank a little from that
identification, and said to herself, on the side of good. For that there
was a struggle going on between good and evil, which in some mysterious
way centred in Lord Erradeen, she was mysteriously aware, she could not
tell how.

"Yon young lord will be the better of his mother," Hamish was saying,
his voice coming to her vaguely, running on without any thought of
reply, mingled with the larger sound of the oars upon the rowlocks, the
long sweep of them through the loch, the gurgle and tinkle of the water
as the boat cut through. Hamish was faintly visible and even retained
till it grew quite dark some trace of colour in his favourite garment.
"He'll be the better of his mother," he said; "there will aye be a want
when there's no a leddy in the house. Weeman servants are no to lippen
to. A young man when he has not a wife, he will be muckle the better for
his mother."

Oona heard the words vaguely like a chant amid all those sounds of the
loch which were the music and accompaniment of her own being. She ran up
the slope when they landed, and burst into the little drawing-room which
was so bright after the darkness of the evening world, with a pleasure
in her little adventure, and in having something to tell which is only
known in the deep recesses, the unbroken quiet of rural life. Mrs.
Forrester was just beginning, as she herself said, to "weary" for Oona's
return. She had put down her knitting and taken a book. Again she had
put aside her book and taken the knitting. Oona was late. Oona meant the
world and life to the solitary lady on the crest of the isle. The house,
the little retired nest amid the trees, was full and cheerful when she
was there, and though Mysie and the cook, "ben the house," gave now and
then a sign of life, yet nothing was complete until the sound of the
boat drawn up on the shingle, the unshipping oars, the light firm foot
on the path, followed by the heavier tread, scattering the gravel, of
Hamish, gave token that all the little population were gathered within
the circle of their rocks and waters. Then Mrs. Forrester brightened and
turned her face towards the door with cheerful expectation: for it
became a little too cold now to go down to the beach to meet the boat,
even with the fur cloak upon her shoulders, which had been her wont on
summer nights, and even on wintry days.

"His mother, poor young man! Dear me, that is very interesting, Oona. I
was not sure he had a mother. That's good news: for I always took an
interest in Lord Erradeen, like one of our own boys. Indeed, you know,
Oona, I always thought him like Rob, though their complexions are
different. Dear me! I am very glad you were on the spot, and able to
show her a little civility. But he should have been there, oh! he should
have been there, to meet her. If any of the boys were to do that to me,
I would not know what to think--to leave me to the civility of any
person that might be passing. Oh, fie! no, I would not know what to
think."

"I know what you would think," said Oona, "that there must have been
some mistake, that they did not know the hour of the train, or did not
know which train, or that they had been too late of starting,
or--something. You would be sure to find a good reason, mamma."

"Well, that's true, Oona; no doubt it would be something of that kind,
for it is impossible that a nice lad (and Lord Erradeen was always
that) would show himself neglectful of his mother. Poor lady! and she
would be tired after her journey. I am very glad you were there to show
her a little attention. She will perhaps think, as so many of those
English do, that we're cold and distant in the north. My dear, you can
just ring for the tea: and we'll go and call upon her to-morrow, Oona.
Well, perhaps not to-morrow; but wait till she is well rested. We'll go
on Thursday, and you can just mention it about, wherever you are
to-morrow, that everybody may know. It is such a fine thing: for a young
man to have his mother with him (when he has not a wife), that we must
give her a warm welcome, poor lady," Mrs. Forrester said. She had no
reason to call Mrs. Methven poor, but did it as a child does, with a
meaning of kindness. She was in fact much pleased and excited by the
news. It seemed to throw a gleam of possible comfort over the head of
the loch. "The late lord had no woman about him," she said to herself
after Oona had left the room. She had quite forgotten that she was
beginning to "weary." "Did you hear, Mysie," she went on when "the tea"
appeared with all its wealth of scones, "that Lord Erradeen was
expecting his mother? I am almost as glad to hear it as if one of our
own boys had come home."

"It is a real good thing for the young lord, mem," said Mysie; "and no
doubt you'll be going to see her, being such near neighbours, and my
lord such great friends with the isle."

"I would not say very great friends, oh no," said Mrs. Forrester,
deprecatory, but with a smile of pleasure on her face. "There is little
to tempt a young gentleman here. But no doubt we will call as soon as
she is rested--Miss Oona and me."

This formed the staple of their conversation all the evening, and made
the little room cheerful with a sentiment of expectation.

"And what kind of a person did you find her, Oona? And do you think she
will be a pleasant neighbour? And he was at the water-side to meet her,
when he saw the boat? And was he kind? and did he show a right feeling?"

These questions Mrs. Forrester asked over and over again. She put
herself in the place of the mother who had arrived so unexpectedly
without any one to meet her.

"And you will be sure to mention it, whoever you see to-morrow," she
repeated several times, "that she may see we have all a regard for him.
I know by myself that is the first thing you think of," Mrs. Forrester
added with a pleasant smile. "The boys" were everything they ought to
be. There were no eccentricities, nothing out of the way, about them to
make public opinion doubtful. Wherever they went, their mother, pleased,
but not surprised, heard everything that was pleasant of them. She "knew
by herself" that this was what Walter's mother would want to hear.

And Oona "mentioned it" to the Ellermore Campbells, with whom she had
some engagement next morning, and where she met Miss Herbert from the
Lodge. Julia was already popular with her nearest neighbours, and had an
attendant at her side in the shape of a friend invited by Sir Thomas as
an ardent sportsman, but of whom Julia had taken the command from his
first appearance. She was in high spirits, finding everything go well
with her, and slightly off her balance with the opening up of new
prosperity. She threw herself into the discussion with all the certainty
of an old acquaintance.

"I don't understand why you should be so pleased," said Julia. "Are you
pleased? or is it only a make-believe? Oh, no, dear Oona; I do not
suppose you are so naughty as that. You never were naughty in your
life--was she? Never tore her pinafore, or dirtied her frock? It is
pretty of you, all you girls, to take an interest in Walter's mother;
but for my part I like young men best without their mothers," Miss
Herbert said, with a laugh, and a glance towards the attendant squire,
who said to himself that here was a girl above all pretences, who knew
better than to attempt to throw dust in the eyes of wise men like
himself.

Some of the Ellermore girls laughed, for there is nothing that girls and
boys are more afraid of than this reputation of never having dirtied
their pinafores; while their mother, with the easy conviction of a
woman so full of sons and daughters that she is glad, whenever she can,
to shirk her responsibilities, said:

"Well, that is true enough: a young man should not be encumbered with an
old woman; and if I were Mrs. Methven----"

"But thank Heaven, you are not at all like Mrs. Methven," said Julia.
"She is always after that unfortunate boy. It did not matter where he
went, he was never free of her. Sitting up for him, fancy! making him
give her an account of everything. He had to count up how many times he
came to see me."

"Which perhaps would be difficult," some one said.

Julia laughed--that laugh of triumph which disturbs feminine nerves.

"He did come pretty often," she said, "poor fellow. Oh, most innocently!
to get me to play his accompaniments. Don't you know he sings? Oh, yes,
very tolerably: if he would but open his mouth, I used to tell him; but
some people like to be scolded, I think."

"By you," said the attendant in an undertone.

Julia gave him a look which repaid him.

"I always had to take his part. Poor Walter!" she said with a sigh. "And
then when I had him by myself I scolded him. Isn't that the right way? I
used to get into great trouble about that boy," she added. "When one
has known a person all one's life one can't help taking an
interest----And he was so mismanaged in his youth."

"Here is a Daniel come to judgment," said Jeanie Campbell: "so much
wiser than the rest of us. Lord Erradeen must be years older than you
are. Let us call, mother, all the same, and see what sort of a dragon
she is."

"I shall call, of course," the mother said; "and I don't want to hear
anything about dragons. I am one too, I suppose. Thank you, Oona, for
telling me. I should not like to be wanting in politeness. Your mother
will be going to-morrow, I shouldn't wonder? Well, we shall go the next
day, girls. Erradeen marches with Ellermore, and I know your father
wishes to pay every respect."

"I suppose when you're a lord," said Tom, who was very far down in the
family, and of no account, "you can go upon a rule of your own; but it
would be far greater fun for Erradeen if he would mix himself up more
with other people. Did anybody ever find out who that fellow was that
was staying with him? Braithwaite thought he must be something very fine
indeed--a foreign prince, or that sort. He said such a fellow couldn't
be English without being well known. It seems he knew everybody, and
everything you could think of. A tremendous swell, according to
Braithwaite. Oona, who was he? you ought to know."

At this all eyes turned to Oona, who grew red in spite of herself.

"I have no way of knowing," she said. "I saw such a person once--but I
never heard who he was."

"I am not superstitious," said Mrs. Campbell, "but there are people seen
about that old castle that--make your blood run cold. No, I never saw
anything myself; but your father says----"

"My father never met this fellow," cried Tom. "He wasn't a fellow to
make any mistake about. Neither old nor young--oh, yes, oldish: between
forty and fifty; as straight as a rod, with eyes that go through and
through you; and a voice--I think Erradeen himself funks him. Yes, I do.
He turned quite white when he heard his voice."

"There are all kinds of strange stories about that old castle," said one
of the Campbell sisters in an explanatory tone, addressing Julia. "You
must not be astonished if you hear of unearthly lights, and some
dreadful ordeal the heir has to go through, and ghosts of every
description."

"I wish, Jeanie," said Tom, "when a fellow asks a question, that you
would not break in with your nonsense. Who is talking of ghosts? I am
asking who a fellow was--a very fine gentleman, I can tell you;
something you don't see the like of often----" The young man was much
offended by his sister's profanity. He went to the door with Oona,
fuming. "These girls never understand," he said; "they make a joke of
everything. This was one of the grandest fellows I ever saw--and then
they come in with their rubbish about ghosts!"

"Never mind," Oona said, giving him her hand. The conversation somehow
had been more than she herself could bear, and she had come away with a
sense of perplexity and indignation. Tom, who was hot and indignant too,
was more in sympathy with her than the others who talked about ghosts,
which made her angry she could scarcely tell why.

"Let me walk with you," said Julia Herbert, following. "I have sent
Major Antrobus to look after the carriage. He is a friend of my cousin
Sir Thomas, and supposed to be a great sportsman, but not so devoted to
slaughter as was hoped. Instead of slaughtering, he is slaughtered, Lady
Herbert says. I am sure I don't know by whom. Do let me walk with you a
little way. It is so nice to be with you." Julia looked into Oona's face
with something of the ingratiating air which she assumed to her victims
of the other sex. "Dear Miss Forrester----" and then she stopped with a
laugh. "I don't dare to call you by your Christian name."

"It must be I then that am the dragon, though I did not know it," Oona
said; but she did not ask to be called by her Christian name.

"I see--you are angry with me for what I said of Mrs. Methven. It is
quite true, however; that is the kind of woman she is. But I don't
excuse Walter, for all that. He was very wicked to her. Ever since he
was a boy at school he has been nasty to his mother. Everybody says it
is her own fault, but still it was not nice of him, do you think? Oh,
_I_ think him very nice, in many ways. I have known him so long. He has
always been most agreeable to me--sometimes _too_ agreeable," said Julia
with a smile, pausing, dwelling upon the recollection. "But his mother
and he never got on. Sometimes those that are the very nicest out of
doors are rather disagreeable at home. Haven't you seen that? Oh, I
have, a hundred times. Of course the mother is sure to be to blame. She
ought to have made a cheerful home for him, you know, and asked young
people, and cheerful people, instead of a set of fogies. But she never
would do that. She expected him to put up with her old-fashioned ways."

Oona made no reply. She was disturbed in the ideal that had been rising
within her--an ideal not all made up of sunshine and virtue, but where
at least the darker shades were of a more elevated description than
petty disobediences on one hand and exactions on the other. Life becomes
mean and small when dragged down to this prosaic level, which was the
natural level in Julia's mind, not pitiful and debasing, as it appeared
to Oona. As there was no response to what she had said, Julia resumed,
putting her hand with a great show of affection within Oona's arm.

"I want you to let me be your friend," she said, "and I don't want you
to be deceived. I fear you think too well of people; and when you hear
anything against them, then you feel displeased. Oh, yes, I know. You
are not pleased with me for telling the truth about the Methvens."

"I wonder rather," said Oona, somewhat coldly, "that being so much a
friend of Lord Erradeen you should--betray him; for we should never have
known this without you."

"Oh, betray him; what hard words!" cried Julia, making believe to shrink
and hide her face. "I would not betray him for worlds, poor dear Walter,
if I had a secret of his. But this is no secret at all," she added, with
a laugh; "everybody knows they never got on. And between ourselves,
Walter has been a sad bad boy. Oh, yes, there is no doubt about it. I
know more of the world than a gentle creature like you, and I know that
no man is very good. Oh, don't say a word, for you don't understand.
There are none of them very good. What goes on when they are knocking
about the world--we don't know what it is: but it is no good. Everybody
that knows human nature knows that. But Walter has gone further, you
know, than the ordinary. Oh, he has been a bad boy. He took up with
Captain Underwood before he knew anything about Kinloch Houran, while he
was not much more than a boy: and everybody knows what Captain Underwood
is. He has gambled and betted, and done a great many still more dreadful
things. And poor Mrs. Methven scolded and cried and nagged: and that
has made everything worse."

Oona's countenance changed very much during this conversation. It
flushed and paled, and grew stern with indignation, and quivered with
pity. It seemed to her that all that was said must be true: it had not
the air of an invention. She asked, with a trembling voice, "If this is
so, how is it that you still care for him? still----" she would have
said--pursue him; but Oona's womanly instincts were too strong for this,
and she faltered and paused, and said, feebly, "still--keep him in your
thoughts?"

"Oh, we must not be too hard, you know," said Julia, smiling; "a man
must sow his wild oats. Oh, I should myself had I been a man. I should
not have been content with your humdrum life. I should have stormed all
over the place and had a taste of everything. Don't you think it is
better for them when they have been downright bad? I do; it makes them
more humble. They know, if you came to inquire into them, there would
not be a word to say for them. I think it is a good thing, for my part;
I don't mind. I am not afraid of it. But still it must be confessed that
Walter has been, oh! very bad! and unkind to his mother; not what people
call a good son. And what is the use of her coming here? She is coming
only to spoil sport, to poke her nose into everything. I have no
patience with that kind of woman. Now I can see in your face you are
quite shocked with me. You think it is I who am bad. But you know I
have taken a great fancy to you, and I want you to know."

"I have no wish to know," said Oona. She had grown very pale--with the
feeling of having been out in a storm and exposed to the beating of
remorseless rain, the fierce hail that sometimes sweeps the hills. She
heard Julia's laugh ringing through like something fiendish in the midst
of her suffering. She was glad to escape, though beaten down and
penetrated by the bitter storm. The silence was grateful to her, and to
feel herself alone. She scarcely doubted that it was all true. There was
something in Miss Herbert's tone which brought conviction with it: the
levity and indulgence were abhorrent to Oona, but they sounded true.
Julia pressed her hand as she turned back, saying something about Major
Antrobus and the carriage, with a laugh at Oona's startled looks, "Don't
look so pale; you are too sensitive. It is nothing more than all of them
do. Good-bye, dear," Julia said. She bent forward with a half-offer of a
kiss, from which Oona shrank: and then went away laughing, calling out,
"People will think you have seen one of those ghosts."

A ghost! Oona went upon her way, silent, aching in heart and spirit.
What was a ghost, as they said, in comparison? No ghost but must know
secrets that would at the least make levity and irreverence impossible.
Nothing but a human voice could mock and jibe at that horror and
mystery of evil before which Oona's spirit trembled. She had walked some
way alone upon the daylight road, with the wholesome wind blowing in her
face, and the calm of nature restoring her to composure, but not
relieving the ache in her heart, before she came to the edge of the
bank, and called in her clear voice to Hamish in the boat.




CHAPTER IX.


"Lord Erradeen!" His appearance was so unexpected, so curiously
appropriate and inappropriate, that Oona felt as if she must be under
some hallucination, and was beholding an incarnation of her own thoughts
instead of an actual man.

And Walter was himself at so high a strain of excitement that the
agitation of her surprise seemed natural to him. It scarcely seemed
possible that everybody around, and specially that she, did not know the
crisis at which he stood. He took the hand which she instinctively put
forward, into both his, and held fast by it as if it had been an anchor
of salvation.

"I am a fugitive," he said. "Will you receive me, will you take me with
you? Have pity upon me, for you are my last hope."

"Lord Erradeen--has anything--happened? What--have you done?"

She trembled, standing by him, gazing in his face, not withdrawing her
hand, yet not giving it, lost in wonder; yet having come to feel that
something he had done, some guilt of his, must be the cause.

"I have done--I will tell you everything. I wish to tell you everything:
let me come with you, Oona."

All this time Hamish, standing behind Walter, was making signs to his
young mistress, which seemed to no purpose but to increase her
perplexity. Hamish shook his shaggy head, and his eyebrows worked up and
down. He gesticulated with his arm pointing along the loch. Finally he
stepped forward with a sort of desperation.

"I'm saying, Miss Oona, that we're in no hurry. There will always be
somebody about that would be glad, real glad, of a visit from you. And
as his lordship is a wee disturbed in his mind, and keen to get home, I
could just put him up to Auchnasheen--it would take me very little
time--and syne come back for you."

Oona stood startled, undecided between the two--alarmed a little by
Walter's looks, and much by the significance of the gestures of Hamish,
and his eagerness and anxiety.

"I will no be keeping you waiting long at all--oh, not at all. And my
lord will be best at home, being a wee disturbed in his mind--and we're
in no hurry--no hurry," Hamish insisted, doing his best to place himself
between the two.

"Hamish thinks I am mad," said Walter. "I do not wonder. But I am not
mad. I want neither home nor anything else--but you. It is come to
that--that nobody can help me but you. First one tries expedients," he
cried, "anything to tide over; but at last one comes--one comes to the
only true--"

"You are speaking very wildly," said Oona. "I don't know what you mean,
Lord Erradeen; and Hamish is afraid of you. What is it? We are only
simple people--we do not understand."

He dropped her hand which he had held all the time, half, yet only half
against her will, for there was something in the way he held it which
forbade all idea of levity. She looked at him very wistfully, anxious,
not with any offence, endeavouring to put away all prepossession out of
her mind--the prejudice in his favour which moved her heart in spite of
herself--the prejudice against him, and indignant wonder whether all was
true that she had heard, which had arisen from Julia's words. Her
eyelids had formed into anxious curves of uncertainty, out of which her
soul looked wistfully, unable to refuse help, perplexed, not knowing
what to do.

"If you refuse to hear me," he said, "I have no other help to turn to. I
know I have no right to use such an argument, and yet if you knew--I
will urge no more. It is death or life--but it is in your hands."

Oona's eyes searched into his very soul.

"What can I do?" she said, wondering. "What power have I? How can I tell
if it is--true--" she faltered, and begged his pardon hastily when she
had said that word. "I mean--I do not mean--" she said confusedly. "But
oh, what can I do? it is not possible that I----"

It is cruel to have the burden put upon you of another's fate. Sometimes
that is done to a woman lightly in the moment of disappointment by a
mortified lover. Was this the sort of threat he meant, or was it
perhaps--true? Oona, who had no guile, was shaken to the very soul by
that doubt. Better to risk an affront in her own person than perhaps to
fail of an occasion in which sincere help was wanted and could be given.
She had not taken her eyes from him, but searched his face with a
profound uncertainty and eagerness. At last, with the sigh of relief
which accompanies a decision, she said to Hamish,

"Push off the boat. Lord Erradeen will help me in," with something
peremptory in her tone against which her faithful servant could make no
further protest.

Hamish proceeded accordingly to push off the boat into the water, and
presently they were afloat, steering out for the centre of the loch.
They were at some distance from the isle on the other side of the low,
green island with its little fringe of trees, so different from the
rocky and crested isles about, which is known on Loch Houran as the Isle
of Rest. The low wall round about the scattered tombs, the scanty ruins
of its little chapel, were all that broke the soft greenness of those
low slopes. There was nothing like it all around in its solemn vacancy
and stillness, and nothing could be more unlike that chill and pathetic
calm than the freight of life which approached it in Oona's boat: she
herself full of tremulous visionary excitement--the young man in his
passion and desperation; even the watchful attendant, who never took his
eyes from Lord Erradeen, and rowed on with all his senses on the alert,
ready to throw himself upon the supposed maniac at a moment's notice, or
without it did the occasion require. There was a pause till they found
themselves separated by a widening interval of water from the shore,
where at any moment a chance passenger might have disturbed their
interview. Here no one could disturb them. Walter placed himself in
front of Hamish facing Oona: but perhaps the very attitude, the freedom
and isolation in which he found himself with her, closed his lips. For a
minute he sat gazing at her, and did not speak.

"You wished--to say something to me, Lord Erradeen?"

It was she again, as Katie had done before, who recalled to him his
purpose--with a delicate flush colouring the paleness of her face, half
in shame that after all she had to interfere to bring the confession
forth.

"So much," he said, "so much that I scarcely know where to begin." And
then he added, "I feel safe with you near me. Do you know what it means
to feel safe? But you never were in deadly danger. How could you be?"

"Lord Erradeen, do not mystify me with these strange sayings," she
cried. "Do they mean anything? What has happened to you? or is it
only--is it nothing but----"

"A pretence, do you think, to get myself a hearing--to beguile you into
a little interest? That might have been. But it is more serious, far
more serious. I told you it was life or death." He paused for a moment
and then resumed. "Do you remember last year when you saved me?"

"I remember--last year," she said with an unsteady voice, feeling the
flush grow hotter and hotter on her cheek, for she did not desire to be
reminded of that self-surrender, that strange merging of her being in
another's which was her secret, of which she had been aware, but no one
else. "I never understood it," she added, with one meaning for herself
and one for him. The hidden sense was to her more important than the
other. "It has always been--a mystery----"

"It was the beginning of the struggle," he said. "I came here, you
know--don't you know?--out of poverty to take possession of my
kingdom--that was what I thought. I found myself instead at the
beginning of a dreary battle. I was not fit for it, to begin with. Do
you remember the old knights had to prepare themselves for their
chivalry with fasting, and watching of arms, and all that--folly----" A
gleam of self-derision went over his face, and yet it was deadly serious
underneath.

"It was no folly," she said.

"Oh, do you think I don't know that? The devil laughs in me, now and
then, but I don't mean it. Oona--let me call you Oona, now, if never
again--I had neither watched nor prayed----"

He made a pause, looking at her pitifully; and she, drawn, she knew not
how, answered, with tears in her eyes, "I have heard that you--had
strayed----"

"That means accidentally, innocently," he said. "It was not so. I had
thought only of myself: when I was caught in the grip of a will stronger
than mine, unprepared. There was set before me--no, not good and evil as
in the books, but subjection to one--who cared neither for good nor
evil. I was bidden to give up my own will, I who had cared for nothing
else: to give up even such good as was in me. I was not cruel. I cared
nothing about worldly advantages; but these were henceforward to be the
rule of my life--pleasant, was it not?" he said with a laugh, "to a man
who expected to be the master--of everything round."

At the sound of his laugh, which was harsh and wild, Hamish, raising
himself so as to catch the eye of his mistress, gave her a questioning,
anxious look. Oona was very pale, but she made an impatient gesture with
her hand to her humble guardian. She was not herself at ease; an
agonizing doubt lest Walter's mind should have given way had taken
possession of her. She answered him as calmly as she could, but with a
tremor in her voice, "Who could ask that, Lord Erradeen? Oh no, no--you
have been deceived."

"You ask me who! you who gave me your hand--your hand that was like
snow--that had never done but kindness all your life--and saved me--so
that I defied him. And you ask me who?"

He put out his hand as he spoke and touched hers as it lay in her lap.
His face was full of emotion, working and quivering. "Give it to me,
Oona!--will you give it to me? I am not worthy that you should touch me.
It has been said to me that you would turn from me--ah, with
disgust!--_if you knew_. And I want you to know everything. For you gave
it then without pausing to think. Oona! I am going to tell you
everything. Give it to me," he said, holding out his hands one over the
other to receive and clasp hers, his eyes moist, his lips appealing with
a quivering smile of entreaty. And how may it be told what was in Oona's
heart? Her whole being was moved through and through with tenderness,
wonder, pity. Her hand seemed to move of itself towards him. The impulse
was upon her almost too strong to be resisted, to throw her arms around
him, like a mother with a child--to identify herself with him whatever
might follow. The womanly instinct that held her back--that kept all
these impulses in check and restrained the heart that seemed leaping out
of her bosom towards this man whom she loved in spite of herself, and
who had need of her, most sacred of all claims--was like a frame of
iron round her, against which she struggled, but from which she could
not get free. Tears filled her eyes--she clasped her hands together in
an involuntary appeal. "What can I do? What can I do?" she cried.

"You shall hear all," said he. "I have tried everything before coming
back to that which I always knew was my only hope. I fled away after
that night. Do you remember?" (She almost smiled at this, for she
remembered far better than he, and the wonder and despair of it, and his
boat going away over the silent loch, and his face eager to be gone, and
she indignant, astonished, feeling that her life went with him; but of
all this he knew nothing.) "I fled--thinking I could escape and forget.
There seemed no better way. There was no one to help me, only to mar and
waste--what was all wasted and spoilt already. I want to tell you
everything," he said faltering, drooping his head, withdrawing his eyes
from her, "but I have not the courage--you would not understand me.
Nothing that you could imagine could reach to a hundredth part of the
evil I have known." He covered his face with his hands. The bitterness
of the confession he dared not make seemed to stifle his voice and every
hope.

And Oona's heart quivered and beat against the strong bondage that held
it in, and her hands fluttered with longing to clasp him and console
him. What woman can bear to hear out such a confession, not to interrupt
it with pardon, with absolution, with cries to bring forth the fairest
robe? She touched his head with her hands for a moment, a trembling
touch upon his hair, and said, "God forgive you. God will forgive you,"
with a voice almost choked with tears.

He raised his head and looked at her with an eager cry. "I want--not
forgiveness. I want life," he cried, "life, new life. I want to be born
again. Is not that in the Bible? To be born again, to begin again from
the beginning, everything new. Help me, Oona! I am not thinking of
the past. It is _now_ I am thinking of. I am not thinking of
forgiveness--punishment if you please, anything!--but a new life. He
knew man who said that," Walter cried, raising his head. "What use is it
to me to forgive me? I want to be born again."

When he thus delivered himself of his exceeding bitter cry, this woman
too, like his mother, answered him with a shining face, with eyes
swimming in tears, and brilliant with celestial certainty. She put out
her hands to him without a moment's hesitation, and grasped his and
smiled.

"Oh, that is all provided for!" she said. "Yes, He knew! It is all ready
for you--waiting--waiting. Don't you know our Lord stands at the door
and knocks, till you are ready to let Him in? And now you are ready.
There is nothing more."

He received the soft hands within his with feelings indescribable, at
such a height of emotion that all the lesser shades and degrees were
lost. He twined her fingers among his own, clasping them with an entire
appropriation.

"Oona," he said, "the house is yours, and all in it. Open the door to
your Lord, whom I am not worthy to come near--and to everything that is
good. It is yours to do it. Open the door!"

They had forgotten Hamish who sat behind, pulling his long, even
strokes, with his anxious shaggy countenance fixed like that of a
faithful dog upon his mistress, whom he had to guard. He saw the two
heads draw very close together, and the murmur of the voices.

"What will she be saying to him? She will be winning him out of yon
transport. She will be puttin' peace in his hairt. She has a voice that
would wile the bird from the tree," said Hamish to himself. "But oh
hon!--my bonnie Miss Oona," Hamish cried aloud.

This disturbed them and made them conscious of the spectator, who was
there with them, separate from all the world. Oona, with a woman's
readiness to throw her veil over and hide from the eye of day all that
is too sacred for the vulgar gaze, raised her face, still quivering with
tender and holy passion.

"Why do you say 'oh hon?' There is nothing to say 'oh hon' for, Hamish.
No, no; but the other way."

Hamish looked across the young lord, whose head was bowed down still
over Oona's hands, which he held. The boatman gave him a glance in which
there was doubt and trouble, and then raised his shaggy eyebrows, and
addressed a look of entreaty and warning to the fair inspired face that
hovered over Walter like a protecting angel. "Ye will not be doing the
like of that," he said, "without thought?"

And all the time the boat swept on over the reflections in the water, by
the low shore of the Isle of Rest where death had easy landing, away
among the feathery islets, all tufted brown and crimson to the water's
edge, where nothing but the wild life of the woods could find
footing:--nothing near them but the one anxious, humble retainer,
watching over Oona, for whom no one in heaven or earth, save himself,
entertained any fear. He quickened those long strokes in the excitement
of his soul, but neither did Walter take any account of where he was
going, nor Oona awake out of the excitement of the moment to think of
the descent into common life which was so near. Hamish only, having the
entire conduct of them, hastened their progress back to ordinary
existence--if perhaps there might be some aid of reason and common
judgment (as he said to himself) there, to see that the man was in his
right senses before Oona should be bound for life.

There was no excitement about the isle. It lay as calm in the sunshine
as if nothing but peace had ever passed by that piece of solid earth,
with its rocks and trees, that little human world amid the waters; every
jagged edge of rock, every red-tinted tree against the background of
tall firs, and the firs themselves in their dark motionless green, all
shining inverted in the liquid clearness around. The two were still
afloat, though their feet were on solid ground; and still apart from all
the world, though the winding way led direct to the little centre of
common life in which Oona was all in all. But they did not immediately
ascend to that gentle height. They paused first on the little platform,
from which Kinloch Houran was the chief object. One of those flying
shadows that make the poetry of the hills was over it for a moment,
arrested as by some consciousness of nature, while they stood and gazed.
There Walter stood and told to Oona the story of Miss Milnathort, and
how she had said that two, set upon all good things, would hold the
secret in their hands. Two--and here were the two. It seemed to him that
every cloud had fled from his soul from the moment when he felt her
hands in his, and had bidden her "open the door." Oh, fling wide the
door to the Christ who waits outside, the Anointed, the Deliverer of
men: to peace and truth, that wait upon Him, and mercy and kindness, and
love supreme that saves the world! Fling wide the doors! Not a bolt or
bar but that soft hand shall unloose them, throw them wide, that the
Lord may come in. Not a crevice, or corner, or dark hiding-place of evil
but shall open to the light. He said so standing there, holding her hand
still, not only as a lover caressing, protecting, holds the soft hand he
loves, but as a man drowning will hold by the hand held out to save him.
It was both to Walter. He told her, and it was true, that from the day
when she had put it into his a year ago, he had never lost the
consciousness that in this hand was his hope.

Oona was penetrated by all these words to the depths of her heart. What
girl could be told that in her hands was the saving of one she loved,
without such a movement of the soul to the highest heroism and devotion
as raises human nature above itself? Her soul seemed to soar, drawing
his with it, into heights above. She felt capable of everything--of the
highest effort and the humblest service. That union of the spiritual
being above his, and the human longing beneath, came back to her in all
the joy of a permitted and befitting mood. She was his to raise him
above all those soils of life of which he was sick and weary; and his to
sweep away the thorns and briars out of his path; to lead him and to
serve him, to mingle her being in his life so that no one henceforward
should think of Oona save as his second and helpmeet: yet so to guide
his uncertain way as that it should henceforward follow the track of
light by which the best of all ages has gone. Even to understand that
office of glory and humility demands an enlightenment, such as those who
do not love can never attain. To Oona it seemed that life itself became
glorious in this service. It raised her above all earthly things. She
looked at him with the pity of an angel, with something of the
tenderness of a mother, with an identification and willingness to submit
which was pure woman. All was justified to her--the love that she had
given unsought, the service which she was willing and ready to give.

He stopped before they had reached the height upon which stood home and
the sweet and simple existence which embraced these mysteries without
comprehending them. A darker shadow, a premonition of evil, came over
him.

"And yet," he said, "I have not told you all. I have something more
still to say."




CHAPTER X.


What did there remain to say?

He had made his confession, which, after all, was no confession, and she
had stopped his mouth with pardon. His cry for new life had overcome
every reluctance in her. Her delicate reserve, the instinct that
restrained her, had no more power after that. She had stood no longer
behind any barrier--at that touch she had thrown her heart wide open and
taken him within.

"What more?" she said. "There can be no more."

"Much more: and you were to hear all: not only the wretched folly into
which I fled, to try if I could forget, but something meaner,
nearer----something for which you will despise me. Oh, do not smile; it
is past smiling for you and me--for you as well as me now, Oona. God
forgive me that have tangled your life in mine!"

"What is it?" she said, giving him an open look of trust and confidence.
"I am not afraid."

He was. Far worse than the general avowal of sins which she did not
understand was the avowal he had to make of something which she could
understand. He perceived that it would wound her to the heart--He had
no fear now that Oona would throw him off. She had put her hand into
his, and was ready to pour the fresh and spotless stream of her life
into his. It was no more possible for her to separate herself, to
withdraw from him, whatever might happen. He perceived this with a keen
pang of remorse, for the first time entering with all his heart into the
soul of another, and understanding what it meant. She could not now turn
her back upon him, go away from him; and he was about to give her a
sharp, profound, intolerable wound.

"Oona," he said, with great humility, "it occurred to-day. I cannot tell
whether you will be able to see why I did it, or how I did it. This
morning----" He paused here, feeling that the words hung in his throat
and stifled him. "This morning--I went--and insulted Katie Williamson,
and asked her--to marry me."

She had been listening with her sweet look of pity and
tenderness--sorry, sorry to the depths of her heart, for the evil he had
done--sorry beyond tears; but yet ready with her pardon, and not afraid.
At the name of Katie Williamson there came up over her clear face the
shadow of a cloud--not more than the shadow. When such words as these
are said they are not to be understood all at once. But they woke in her
a startled curiosity--a strange surprise.

"This morning--it is still morning," she said, bewildered; "and
Katie----"

"Oona! you do not understand."

"No. I do not quite--understand. What is it? This morning? And
Katie----"

"I asked her this morning to join her land to my land and her money to
my money: to be--my wife."

She drew her hand slowly out of his, looking at him with eyes that grew
larger as they gazed. For some time she could not say a word, but only
got paler and paler, and looked at him.

"Then what place--have I?--what am--I?" she said, slowly. Afterwards a
sudden flush lighted up her face. "She would not: and then you came--to
me?" she said.

A faint smile of pain came to her mouth. Walter had seen that look very
recently before--when he told his mother why it was that he had sent for
her. Was he capable of giving nothing but pain to those he loved? If he
had tried to explain or apologise, it is doubtful whether Oona's
faculties, so suddenly and strangely strained, could have borne it. But
he said nothing. What was there to say?--the fact which he had thus
avowed was beyond explanation. He met her eyes for a moment, then
drooped his head. There was nothing--nothing to be said. It was true. He
had gone to another woman first, and then, when that failed, as a last
resource had come to her. The anguish was so sharp that it brought that
smile. It was incredible in the midst of her happiness. Her heart seemed
wrung and crushed in some gigantic grasp. She looked at him with
wondering, incredulous misery.

"You thought then, I suppose," she said, "that one--was as good as
another?"

"I did not do that, Oona; it is, perhaps, impossible that you should
understand. I told you--I had tried--every expedient: not daring to come
to the one and only--the one, the only----"

She waved her hand as if putting this aside, and stood for a moment
looking out vaguely upon the loch--upon the sheen of the water, the
castle lying darkly in shadow, the banks stretching upward and downward
in reflection. They had been glorified a moment since in the new union;
now they were blurred over, and conveyed no meaning. Then she said
drearily--

"My mother--will wonder why we do not come in--"

"May I speak to her--at once? Let me speak."

"Oh no!" she cried. "Say nothing--nothing! I could not bear it."

And then he seized upon her hand, the hand she had taken from him, and
cried out--

"You are not going to forsake me, Oona! You will not cast me away?"

"I cannot," she said very low, with her eyes upon the landscape, "I
cannot!" Then, turning to him, "You have my word, and I have but one
word: only everything is changed. Let us say no more of it just now. A
little time--I must have a little time."

And she turned and walked before him to the house. They went in silence,
not a word passing between them. Mysie, startled, came out to the door
to ascertain who it could be who were preceded by the sound of footsteps
only, not of voices. It was "no canny," she said. And to think this was
Miss Oona, whose cheerful voice always came home before her to warn the
house that its pride and joy was approaching! Mysie, confounded, went to
open the door of the drawing-room that her mistress might be made to
share her uneasiness.

"It will just be Miss Oona, mem, and my lord," Mysie said, "but very
down, as if something had happened and not saying a word."

"Bless me!" cried Mrs. Forrester. Her heart naturally leapt to the only
source of danger that could affect her deeply. "It is not a mail day,
Mysie," she said; "there can be no ill news."

"The Lord be thanked for that!" Mysie said: and then stood aside to give
admittance to those footsteps which came one after the other without any
talking or cheerful note of sound. Mrs. Forrester rose to meet them with
a certain anxiety, although her mind was at rest on the subject of the
mails. It might be something wrong at Eaglescairn: it might be----

"Dear me! what is the matter, Oona? You are white, as if you had seen a
ghost," she said, with a more tangible reason for her alarm.

"I am quite well, mamma. Perhaps I may have seen a ghost--but nothing
more," she said with a half-laugh. "And here is Lord Erradeen whom we
picked up, Hamish and I."

"And Lord Erradeen, you are just very whitefaced too," cried Mrs.
Forrester. "Bless me, I hope you have not both taken a chill. That will
sometimes happen when the winter is wearing on, and ye are tempted out
on a fine morning with not enough of clothes. I have some cherry brandy
in my private press, and I will just give you a little to bring back the
blood to your cheeks: and come in to the fire. Dear me, Oona, do not
shiver like that! and you not one that feels the cold. You have just
taken a chill upon the water, though it is such a beautiful morning. And
so you have got your mother with you, Lord Erradeen?"

"She came yesterday. She was so fortunate as to meet--Miss Forrester."

It seemed to him a wrong against which he was ready to cry out to earth
and heaven that he should have to call her by that formal name. He
paused before he said it, and looked at her with passionate reproach in
his eyes. And Oona saw the look, though her eyes were averted, and
trembled, with what her mother took for cold.

"You may be sure Oona was very content to be of use: and I hope now you
have got her you will keep her, Lord Erradeen. It will be fine for your
house and the servants, and all, to have a lady at Auchnasheen. There
has not been a lady since the last lord but one, who married the last of
the Glen Oriel family, a person that brought a great deal of property
with her. I remember her very well. They said she was not his first
love, but she was a most creditable person, and well thought upon, and
kind to the poor. We were saying to ourselves, Oona and me, that we
would go up the loch to-morrow and call, if you are sure Mrs. Methven is
rested from her journey, and will like to see such near neighbours."

"But, mother--" Oona said.

"But what? There is no but, that I know of. You know that it was all
settled between us. We thought to-day she would be tired, and want
repose rather than company. But by to-morrow she would be rested, and
willing to see what like persons we are in this place. That would be
very natural. And I am proud Oona was in the way, to take her across the
loch. People that come from flat countries where there is little water,
they are sometimes a little timid of the loch, and in the dark too. But
she will have got over all that by to-morrow, and to call will be a real
pleasure. Did you mention, Oona, at Ellermore and other places that Mrs.
Methven had arrived?--for everybody will be keen to see your mother,
Lord Erradeen."

"It is very kind. She will rather see you than any one."

"Hoots," said Mrs. Forrester with a smile and a shake of her head, "that
is just flattery; for we have very little in our power except good-will
and kindness: but it will give me great pleasure to make your mother's
acquaintance, and if she likes mine, that will be a double advantage.
But you are not going away, Lord Erradeen? You have this moment come!
and Mysie will be reckoning upon you for lunch, and I have no doubt a
bird has been put to the fire. Well, I will not say a word, for Mrs.
Methven's sake, for no doubt she will be a little strange the first day
or two. Oona, will you see that Hamish is ready? And we will have the
pleasure of calling to-morrow," Mrs. Forrester said, following to the
door. Her easy smiles, the little movements of her hands, the fluttering
of the pretty ribbons in her cap, added to the calm and tranquil stream
of her talk so many additional details of the softest quietude of common
life. She stood and looked after the young pair as they went down
together to the beach, waving her hand to them when they turned towards
her, as unconscious of any disturbing influence as were the trees that
waved their branches too. Passion had never been in her little composed
and cheerful world. By-and-by she felt the chill of the wind, and turned
and went back to her fireside. "No doubt that winter is coming now," she
said to herself, "and no wonder if Oona, poor thing, was just frozen
with the cold on the water. I wish she may not have taken a chill." This
was the greatest danger Mrs. Forrester anticipated, and she did not
doubt that a hot drink when Oona went to bed would make all right.

It was very strange to both of the young wayfarers to find themselves
alone again in the fresh air and stillness. Since the moment when they
had landed in an ecstasy of union, until this moment when they went
down again to the same spot, years might have passed for anything they
knew. They did not seem to have a word to say to each other. Oona was a
step or two in advance leading the way, while behind her came Walter,
his head drooping, his courage gone, not even the despair in him which
had given him a wild and fiery energy. Despair itself seemed hopeful in
comparison with this. He had risen into another life, come to fresh
hopes, received beyond all expectation the help which he had sought for
elsewhere in vain, but which here alone he could ever find; but now the
soul had gone out of it all, and he stood bewildered, deprived of any
power to say or do. All through his other miseries there had been the
thought of this, like a distant stronghold in which if he ever reached
it there would be deliverance. If he ever reached it! and now he had
reached it, but too late. Was it too late? He followed her helplessly,
not able to think of anything he could say to her, though he had pleaded
so eagerly, so earnestly, a little while ago. There comes a time after
we have poured out our whole soul in entreaties, whether to God or man,
when exhaustion overpowers the mind, and utterance is taken from us, and
even desire seems to fail--not that what we long for is less to be
desired, but that every effort is exhausted and a dreary discouragement
has paralysed the soul. Walter felt not less, but more than ever, that
in Oona was his every hope. But he was dumb and could say no more,
following her with a weight upon his heart that allowed him no further
possibility, no power to raise either voice or hand. They walked thus as
in a mournful procession following the funeral of their brief joy, half
way down the bank. Then Oona who was foremost paused for a moment,
looking out wistfully upon that familiar prospect, upon which she had
looked all her life. The scene had changed, the sky had clouded over, as
if in harmony with their minds; only over Kinloch Houran a watery ray of
sunshine, penetrating through the quickly gathering clouds, threw a
weird light. The ruinous walls stood out red under this gleam askance of
the retreating sun. It was like an indication--a pointing out, to the
executioner of some deadly harm or punishment, of the victim. Oona
paused, and he behind her, vaguely turning as she turned, gazing at this
strange significant light, which seemed to point out, "This is the
spot"--was that what was meant?--"the place to be destroyed."

"It was in shadow a moment since," Oona said, and her voice seemed to
thrill the air that had been brooding over them in a heavy chill, as if
under the same influence that made them voiceless. What did she mean?
and why should she care----

"The shadow was better," he said, but he did not know what he himself
meant more than what she could mean.

"It has come here," said Oona, "between you and me. You said you
insulted Katie. I cannot think that it was your meaning to--insult me."

"Insult--_you_!" his mind was so clear of that, and his own meaning in
respect to the other so evident to him, that the dead quietude of his
discouragement yielded to a momentary impatience. But how was he to make
that clear?

"No, I cannot think it. Whatever you meant, whether it was in levity,
whether it was----I do not believe _that_."

"Oona," he cried, waking to the desperation of the position, "will you
give me up, after all we have said?"

She shook her head sadly.

"I will never now deny you what help I can give you, Lord Erradeen."

He turned from her with a cry of bitterness.

"Help without love is no help. Alms and pity will do nothing for me. It
must be two--who are one."

She answered him with a faint laugh which was more bitter still; but
restrained the jest of pain which rose to her lips, something about
three who could not be one. It was the impulse of keen anguish, but it
would not have become a discussion that was as serious as life and
death.

"It is all a confusion," she said; "what to say or do I know not. It is
such a thing--as could not have been foreseen. Some would think it made
me free, but I do not feel that I can ever be free." She spoke without
looking at him, gazing blankly out upon the landscape. "You said it was
no smiling matter to you or me--to you and me. Perhaps," she
interrupted herself as if a new light had come upon her, "that is the
true meaning of what you say--two that are one; but it is not the usual
creed. Two for misery----"

"Oh not for misery, Oona! there is no misery for me where you are."

"Or--any other," she said with a smile of unimaginable suffering, and
ridicule, and indignation.

He answered nothing. What could he say to defend himself? "If you could
see into my heart," he said after a time, "you would understand. One who
is in despair will clutch at anything. Can you imagine a man trying like
a coward to escape the conflict, rather than facing it, and bringing the
woman he loved into it?"

"Yes," she said, "I can imagine that; but not in the man who is me."
Then she moved away towards the beach, saying, "Hamish is waiting," with
a sigh of weariness.

"Oona," said Walter, "you will give me your hand again before we part?"

"What does it matter if I give it or hold it back? It is yours whether I
will or not. You should have told me before. I should have understood.
Oh, I am ashamed, ashamed! to think of all I have said to you. How could
you betray me first before you told me? In the same morning! It is more
than a woman can bear!" she cried.

Perhaps this outburst of passion relieved her, for she turned and held
out her hand to him with a smile of pain which was heartrending. "It
did not seem like this when we landed," she said.

"And it would not seem like this, oh, Oona! if you could see my heart."

She shook her head, looking at him all the while with that strange
smile, and then drew away her hand and repeated, "Hamish is waiting."
Hamish in the background, standing up against the shining of the water,
with his oar in his hand, waited with his anxious eyes upon his young
lady, not knowing how it was. He would have pitched Lord Erradeen into
the loch, or laid him at his feet with Highland passion, had she given
him a sign. He held the boat for him instead to step in, with an anxious
countenance. Love or hate, or madness or good meaning, Hamish could not
make out what it was.

"To-morrow!" Walter said, "if I can live till to-morrow in this
suspense----"

She waved her hand to him, and Hamish pushed off. And Oona stood as in a
dream, seeing over again the scene which had been in her mind for so
long--but changed. She had watched him go away before, eager to be gone,
carrying her life with him without knowing it, without desiring it: he
unaware of what he was doing, she watching surprised, bereaved of
herself, innocently and unaware. How poignant had that parting been! But
now it was different. He gazed back at her now, as she stood on the
beach, leaving his life with her, all that was in him straining towards
her, gazing till they were each to the other but a speck in the
distance. Two that were one! Oh, not perhaps for mutual joy, not for the
happiness that love on the surface seems to mean--rather for the burden,
the disappointment, the shame. She waved her hand once more over the
cold water, and then turned away. Till to-morrow--"if I can live till
to-morrow"--as he had said.




CHAPTER XI.


The rest of this day passed over Walter like a dream in a fever. Through
a kind of hot mist full of strange reflections, all painful, terrible,
lurid, with confusion and suffering he saw the people and things about
him--his mother questioning him with anxious words, with still more
anxious eyes; his servants looking at him wondering, compassionate; and
heard now and then a phrase which came to his consciousness and
thereafter continued to rise before him from time to time, like a straw
cast into a whirlpool and boiling up as the bubbles went and
came--something about seeing a doctor, something about sending for Mr.
Cameron, with now and then an imploring entreaty, "Oh, my boy! what ails
you? what is wrong?" from Mrs. Methven. These were the words that came
back to his ears in a kind of refrain. He answered, too, somehow, he was
aware, that there was nothing the matter with him, that he wanted no
doctor, no counsellor, in a voice which seemed to come from any point of
the compass rather than from his own lips. It was not because of the
breach which had so rapidly followed the transport of his complete
union with Oona. That, too, had become secondary, a detail scarcely
important in the presence of the vague tempest which was raging within
him, and which he felt must come to some outburst more terrible than
anything he had yet known when he was left to himself. He had come back
to Auchnasheen under the guidance of Hamish, distracted, yet scarcely
unhappy, feeling that at the end, whatever misunderstanding there might
be, he was assured of Oona, her companionship, her help, and, what was
greatest of all, her love. She had not hesitated to let him see that he
had that; and with that must not all obstacles, however miserable,
disappear at the last? But when he landed, the misery that fell upon him
was different from the pain of the temporary misunderstanding. He became
conscious at once that it was the beginning of the last struggle, a
conflict which might end in--he knew not what: death, downfall, flight,
even shame, for aught he knew. The impulse was strong upon him to speed
away to the hillside and deliver himself over to the chances of this
battle, which had a fierce attraction for him on one hand, while on the
other it filled him with a mad terror which reason could not subdue.

So strong was this impulse that he hurried past the gate of Auchnasheen
and took the path that led up to the moors, with a sense of flying from,
yet flying to, his spiritual enemies. He was met there by the
gamekeeper, who began to talk to him about the game, and the expediency
of inviting "twa-three" gentlemen to shoot the coverts down by
Corrieden, an interruption which seemed to his preoccupied soul too
trivial, too miserable, to be borne with. He turned from the astonished
speaker in the midst of his explanations, and rushed back with the
impatience which was part of his character, exaggerated into a sort of
mad intolerance of any interruption. Not there, not there--he began to
remember the wild and mad contest which last year had gone on upon those
hills, and with an instantaneous change of plan retraced his steps to
the house, and burst into his mother's presence, so pale, so wild, with
eyes almost mad in their fire, looking out from the curves of his
eyelids like those of a maniac. Her terror was great. She came up to him
and laid her hands upon him, and cried out, What was it? what was it?
After this the active frenzy that had possessed him seemed to sink into
a maze of feverish confusion which was less violent, less terrible, more
like the operations of nature. He was not aware that he looked at her
piteously, and said, "I want to stay with you, mother"--childlike words,
which penetrated with a misery that was almost sweet to Mrs. Methven's
very heart. She put her arms round him, drawing down his head upon her
bosom, kissing his forehead with trembling lips, holding him fast, as
when he was a child and came to her for consolation. He was scarcely
aware of all this, and yet it soothed him. The excitement of his brain
was calmed. That uneasy haze of fever which confuses everything, the
half-delirium of the senses through which the mind looks as through a
mist, uneasy, yet with visions that are not all miserable, was a sort of
paradise in comparison with the frenzy of a conflict in which every
expedient of torture was exercised upon him. He was grateful for the
relief. That he did not know what he said or what she said, but heard
the answering voices far off, like something musical, was nothing. There
was a kind of safety in that society: the enemy could not show himself
there. He had to stand off baffled and wait--ah, wait! that was certain.
He had not gone away--not Oona, not the mother, could save the victim
altogether. They protected him for the moment, they held the foe at
arm's length: but that could not be always. Sooner or later the last
struggle must come.

Walter remained within-doors all day. It was contrary to all his habits,
and this of itself added to the alarm of all about him; but it was not
inconsistent with the capricious impatient constitution of his mind,
always ready to turn upon itself at a moment's notice, and do that which
no one expected. During every moment of this long day he had to resist
the strong impulse which was upon him--more than an impulse, a tearing
and rending of his spirit, sometimes rising into sudden energy almost
inconceivable--to go out and meet his enemy. But he held his ground so
far with a dumb obstinacy which also was part of his character, and
which was strengthened by the sensation of comparative exemption so long
as he had the protection of others around him, and specially of his
mother's presence. It was with reluctance that he saw her go out of the
room even for a moment; and his eager look of inquiry when she left him,
his attempts to retain her, his strained gaze towards the door till she
returned, gave Mrs. Methven a sort of anguish of pleasure, if those
contradictory words can be put together. To feel that she was something,
much to him, could not but warm her heart; but with that was the misery
of knowing that something must indeed be very far wrong with Walter to
make him thus, after so many years of independence, cling to his mother.

"It is like a fever coming on," she said to Symington, with whom alone
she could take any counsel. "He is ill, very ill, I am sure of it. The
doctor must be sent for. Have you ever seen him like this before?"

"My lady," said old Symington, "them that have the Methvens to deal with
have need of much gumption. Have I seen him like that before? Oh, yes, I
have seen him like that before. It is just their hour and the power o'
darkness. Let him be for two-three days----"

"But in two or three days the fever may have taken sure hold of him. It
may be losing precious time: it may get--fatal force----"

"There is no fears of his life," said old Symington; "there is enough
fear of other things."

"Of what? Oh, for God's sake! tell me; don't leave me in ignorance!" the
mother cried.

"But that's just what I cannot do," Symington said. "By the same taken
that I ken nothing mysel'."

While this conversation was going on, Walter, through his fever, saw
them conspiring, plotting, talking about him as he would have divined
and resented in other moods, but knew vaguely now in his mist of being
that they meant him no harm, but good.

And thus the day went on. He prolonged it as long as he could, keeping
his mother with him till long after the hour when the household was
usually at rest. But, however late, the moment came at last when he
could detain her no longer. She, terrified, ignorant, fearing a
dangerous illness, was still more reluctant to leave him, if possible,
than he was to let her go, and would have sat up all night watching him
had she ventured to make such a proposal. But at last Walter summoned up
all his courage with a desperate effort, an effort of despair which
restored him to himself and made a clear spot amid all the mist and
confusion of the day.

"Mother," he said, as he lighted her candle, "you have been very good to
me to-day! Oh I know you have always been good--and I always ungrateful;
but I am not ungrateful now."

"Oh, Walter! what does that word mean between you and me? If I could but
do anything. It breaks my heart to see you like this."

"Yes, mother," he said, "and it may break my heart. I don't know what
may come of it--if I can stand, or if I must fall. Go and pray for me,
mother."

"Yes, my dearest--yes, my own boy! as I have done every day, almost
every hour, since ever you were born."

"And so will Oona," he said. He made no response of affection to this
brief record of a life devoted to him, which Mrs. Methven uttered with
eyes full of tears and every line of her countenance quivering with
emotion. He was abstracted into a world beyond all such expressions and
responses, on the verge of an ordeal too terrible for him, more terrible
than any he had yet sustained--like a man about to face fearful odds,
and counting up what aids he could depend upon. "And so will Oona," he
repeated to himself, aloud but unawares: and looked up at his mother
with a sad glimmer of a smile and kissed her, and said, "That should
help me." Then, without waiting for her to go first, he walked out of
the room, like a blind man, feeling with his hand before him, and not
seeing where he went.

For already there had begun within him that clanging of the pulses, that
mounting of every faculty of the nerves and blood to his head, the seat
of thought, which throbbed as though it would burst, and to his heart,
which thundered and laboured and filled his ears with billows of sound.
All his fears, half quiescent in the feverish pause of the day, were
suddenly roused to action, ranging themselves to meet the last, the
decisive, the most terrible assault of all. He went into his room and
closed the door upon all mortal succour. The room was large and heavily
furnished in the clumsy fashion of the last generation--heavy curtains,
huge articles of furniture looming dark in the partial light, a gloomy
expanse of space, dim mirrors glimmering here and there, the windows
closely shut up and shrouded, every communication of the fresh air
without, or such succour of light as might linger in the heavens,
excluded. The old castle, with its ruined battlements, seemed a more fit
scene for spiritual conflict than the dull comfort of this gloomy
chamber, shut in from all human communication. But Walter made no
attempt to throw open the closed windows. No help from without could
avail him, and he had no thought or time to spare for any exertion. He
put his candle on the table and sat down to await what should befall.

The night passed like other nights to most men, even to the greater
number of the inhabitants in this house. Mrs. Methven after a while,
worn out, and capable of nothing that could help him, dozed and slept,
half dressed, murmuring familiar prayers in her sleep, ready to start up
at the faintest call. But there came no call. Two or three times in the
night there was a faint stir, and once old Symington, who was also on
the alert, and whose room was near that of his master, saw Lord Erradeen
come out of his chamber with a candle in his hand, the light of which
showed his countenance all ghastly and furrowed as with the action of
years, and go down-stairs. The old man, watching from the gallery above,
saw his master go to the door, which he opened, admitting a blast of
night wind which seemed to bring in the darkness as well as cold.
Symington waited trembling to hear it clang behind the unfortunate
young man. Where was he going to in the middle of the night? But after a
few minutes, the door, instead of clanging, closed softly, and Walter
came back. It might be that this happened more than once while the slow
hours crept on, for the watcher, hearing more than there was to hear,
thought that there were steps about the house, and vague sounds of
voices. But this was all vanity and superstition. No one came in--with
none, save with his own thoughts, did Walter speak. Had his enemy
entered bodily, and even with maddening words maintained a personal
conflict, the sufferer would have been less harshly treated. Once, as
Symington had seen, he was so broken down by the conflict that he was on
the eve of a shameful flight which would have been ruin. When he came
down-stairs with his candle in the dead of the night and opened the
great hall door, he had all but thrown down his arms and consented that
nothing remained for him but to escape while he could, as long as he
could, to break all ties and abandon all succour, and only flee, flee
from the intolerable moment. He had said to himself that he could bear
it no longer, that he must escape anyhow, at any cost, leaving love and
honour, and duty and every higher thought--for what could help
him--nothing--nothing--in earth or heaven.

That which touched him to the quick was not any new menace, it was not
the horror of the struggles through which he had already passed, it was
the maddening derision with which his impulses were represented to him
as the last expedients of the most refined selfishness. When his
tormentor in the morning had bidden him, with a smile, "Be good!" as the
height of policy, it had seemed to Walter that the point of the
intolerable was reached, and that life itself under such an
interpretation became insupportable, a miserable jest, a mockery hateful
to God and man; but there was yet a lower depth, a more hateful derision
still. Love! what was his love? a way of securing help, a means of
obtaining, under pretences of the finest sentiment, some one who would
supremely help him, stand by him always, protect him with the presence
of a nature purer than his own. Nothing was said to the unhappy young
man. It was in the course of his own thoughts that this suggestion arose
like a light of hell illuminating all the dark corners of his being. Had
he ever said to Oona that he loved her? Did he love her? Was it for any
motive but his own safety that he sought her? Katie he had sought for
her wealth, for the increase of importance she could bring, for the
relief from torture she could secure to him. And Oona, Oona whom he
loved! Was it for love he fled to her? Oh, no, but for safety! All was
miserable, all was self, all was for his own interest, to save _him_, to
emancipate him, to make life possible for him. He had started to his
feet when this intolerable consciousness (for was it not true?) took
possession of him. It was true. She was sweet and fair, and good and
lovely, a creature like the angels; but he, miserable, had thought only
that in her company was safety--that she could deliver him. He sent
forth a cry which at the same time sounded like the laughter of despair,
and seemed to shake the house; and took up his candle, and opened his
door and hurried forth to escape, where he did not know, how he did not
know nor care, to escape from the ridicule of this life, the horror of
this travestie and parody of everything good and fair. Heaven and earth!
to seek goodness because it was the most profitable of all things; to
seek love because it was safety; to profane everything dear and sacred
to his own advantage! Can a man know this, and recognise it with all the
masks and pretences torn off, and yet consent to live, and better
himself by that last desecration of all! He went down with hurried steps
through the silence of his house, that silence through which was rising
the prayers of the mother in whose love too he had taken refuge when in
despair, whom he had bidden to go and pray, for his advantage, solely
for him, that he might steal from God a help he did not deserve, by
means of her cries and tears. "And so would Oona," he had said. Oh,
mockery of everything sacred!--all for him, for his self-interest, who
deserved nothing, who made use of all.

He opened the door, and stood bare-headed, solitary, on the edge of the
black and lonely night; behind him life and hope, and torture and
misery--before the void, the blank into which the wretched may escape
and lose--if not themselves, that inalienable heritage of woe, yet
their power to harm those who love them. He loved nobody, it seemed, but
for himself--prized nothing but for himself; held love, honour,
goodness, purity, only as safeguards for his miserable life. Let it go
then, that wretched contemner of all good--disappear into the blackness
of darkness, where God nor man should be disturbed by its exactions
more!

The night was wild with a raving wind that dashed the tree-tops against
the sky, and swept the clouds before it in flying masses; no moon, no
light, gloom impenetrable below, a pale glimpse of heaven above, swept
by black billows of tumultuous clouds; somewhere in the great gloom, the
loch, all invisible, waited for the steps that might stumble upon its
margin; the profound world of darkness closed over every secret that
might be cast into it. He stood on the threshold in a momentary pause,
forlorn, alone, loosing his hold of all that he had clung to, to save
him. Why should he be saved who was unworthy? Why trouble earth or
heaven? The passion and the struggle died out of Walter's soul: a
profound sadness took possession of him; he felt his heart turn
trembling within him, now that he had given up the instinct of
self-preservation which had driven him to her feet--to Oona whom he
loved. God bless her! not for him would be that sweet companionship, and
yet of all things the world contained, was not that the best? Two that
should be one. All that was external died away from him in his despair.
He forgot for the first time since it had been revealed to him, that he
had an enemy, a tyrant waiting for his submission. His heart turned to
the love which he had thought he dishonoured, without even recollecting
that cursed suggestion. It seemed to him now that he was giving it up
for Oona's sake, and that only now all the beauty of it, the sweetness
of it, was clear to him. Oh, the pity! to see all this so lovely, so
fair, and yet have to resign it! What was everything else in comparison
with that? But for her sake, for her dear sake!

How dark it was, impenetrable, closing like a door upon the mortal eyes
which had in themselves no power to penetrate that gloom! He stepped
across the threshold of life, and stood outside, in the dark. He turned
his eyes--for once more, for the last time, in the great calm of
renunciation, his heart in a hush of supreme anguish, without conflict
or struggle--to where she was, separated from him only by silent space
and atmosphere, soon to be separated by more perfect barriers; only to
turn his head that way, not even to see where she was hidden in the
night--so small a satisfaction, so little consolation, yet something
before the reign of nothingness began.

All dark; but no, half way between heaven and earth, what was that,
shining steady through the gloom? Not a star; it was too warm, too
large, too near; the light in Oona's window shining in the middle of the
night when all was asleep around. Then she was not asleep, though
everything else was, but watching--and if watching, then for him. The
little light, which was but a candle in a window, suddenly, brilliantly
lighted up the whole heavens and earth to Walter. Watching, and for him;
praying for him, not because of any appeal of his, but out of her own
heart, and because she so willed it--out of the prodigality, the
generous, unmeasured love which it was her choice to give him--not
forced but freely, because she so pleased. He stood for a moment with
awe in his heart, arrested, not able to make another step, pale with the
revolution, the revelation, the change of all things. His own dark
thoughts died away; he stood astonished, perceiving for the first time
what it was. To have become part of him had brought no joy to Oona, but
it was done, and never could be undone; and to be part of her, what was
that to Walter? He had said it without knowing what it meant, without
any real sense of the great thing he said. Now it fell upon him in a
great wonder, full of awe. He was hers, he was _her_, not himself
henceforward, but a portion of another, and that other portion of him
standing for him at the gates of heaven. His whole being fell into
silence, overawed. He stepped back out of the night and closed softly
the great door, and returned to his room, in which everything was
stilled by a spell before which all evil things fly--the apprehension of
that love which is unmerited, unextorted, unalterable. When he reached
his room, and had closed the door, Walter, with trembling hands undid
the window, and flung it open to the night, which was no more night or
darkness, but part of the everlasting day, so tempered that feeble eyes
might perceive those lights which hide themselves in the sunshine. What
was it he saw? Up in the heavens, where the clouds swept over them,
stars shining, undisturbed, though hidden by moments as the masses of
earthly vapour rolled across the sky; near him stealing out of his
mother's window a slender ray of light that never wavered; further off,
held up as in the very hand of love, the little lamp of Oona. The young
man was silent in a great awe; his heart stirring softly in him, hushed,
like the heart of a child. For him! unworthy! for him who had never
sought the love of God, who had disregarded the love of his mother, who
had profaned the love of woman: down, down on his knees--down to the
dust, hiding his face in gratitude unutterable. He ceased to think of
what it was he had been struggling and contending for; he forgot his
enemy, his danger, himself altogether, and, overawed, sank at the feet
of love, which alone can save.




CHAPTER XII.


Lord Erradeen was found next morning lying on his bed full dressed
sleeping like a child. A man in his evening dress in the clear air of
morning is at all times a curious spectacle, and suggestive of many
uncomfortable thoughts, but there was about Walter as he lay there fast
asleep an extreme youthfulness not characteristic of his appearance on
ordinary occasions, which made the curious and anxious spectator who
bent over him, think instinctively of a child who had cried itself to
sleep, and a convalescent recovering from a long illness. Symington did
not know which his young master resembled the most. The old man stood
and looked at him, with great and almost tender compassion. One of the
windows stood wide open admitting the air and sunshine. But it had
evidently been open all night, and must have chilled the sleeper through
and through. Symington had come at his usual hour to wake Lord Erradeen.
But as he looked at him the water came into his eyes. Instead of calling
him he covered him carefully with a warm covering, softly closed the
window, and left all his usual morning preparations untouched. This
done, he went down-stairs to the breakfast-room where Mrs. Methven, too
anxious to rest, was already waiting for her son. Symington closed the
door behind him and came up to the table which was spread for breakfast.

"My lady," he said, "my lord will no be veesible for some time. I found
him sleeping like a bairn, and I had not the heart to disturb him. No
doubt he's had a bad night, but if I'm any judge of the human
countenance he will wake another man."

"Oh, my poor boy! You did well to let him rest, Symington. I will go up
and sit by him."

"If ye will take my advice, my lady, ye will just take a little
breakfast; a good cup of tea, and one of our fine fresh eggs, or a bit
of trout from the loch; or I would find ye a bonnie bit of the breast of
a bird."

"I can eat nothing," she said, "when my son is in trouble."

"Oh, canny, canny, my lady. I am but a servant, but I am one that takes
a great interest. He's in no trouble at this present moment; he's just
sleeping like a baby, maybe a wee bit worn out, but not a line o' care
in his face; just sleepin'--sleepin' like a little bairn. It will do you
mair harm than him if I may mak' so bold as to speak. A cup of tea, my
lady, just a cup of this fine tea, if nothing else--it will do ye good.
And I'll answer for him," said Symington. "I'm well acquaint with all
the ways of them," the old servant added, "if I might venture, madam,
to offer a word of advice, it would be this, just to let him bee."

A year ago Mrs. Methven would have considered this an extraordinary
liberty for a servant to take, and perhaps would have resented the
advice; but at that time she did not know Symington, nor was she
involved in the mysterious circumstances of this strange life. She
received it with a meekness which was not characteristic, and took the
cup of tea, which he poured out for her, with a lump of sugar too much,
by way of consolation, and a liberal supply of cream, almost with
humility. "If he is not better when he comes down-stairs, I think I must
send for the doctor, Symington."

"I would not, my lady, if I were you. I would just watch over him, but
let him bee. I would wait for two or three days and just put up with
everything. The Methvens are no just a race like other folk. Ye require
great judgment to deal with the Methvens. Ye have not been brought up to
it, my lady, like me."

All this Mrs. Methven received very meekly, and only gratified herself
with a cup of tea which was palatable to her, after Symington, having
done everything he could for her comfort, had withdrawn. She was very
much subdued by the new circumstances in which she found herself, and
felt very lonely and cast away, as in a strange land where everything
was unknown. She sat for a long time by herself, trying to calm her
thoughts by what Symington had said. She consented that he knew a great
deal more than she did, even of her son in his new position, and had
come to put a sort of infinite faith in him as in an oracle. But how
hard it was to sit still, or to content herself with looking out upon
that unfamiliar prospect, when her heart was longing to be by her son's
bedside! Better to let him bee!--alas, she knew very well and had known
for long that it was better to let him bee. But what was there so hard
to do as that was? The shrubberies that surrounded the window allowed a
glimpse at one side of the loch, cold, but gleaming in the morning
sunshine. It made her shiver, yet it was beautiful: and as with the
landscape, so it was with her position here. To be with Walter, ready to
be of use to him, whatever happened, that was well; but all was cold,
and solitary, and unknown. Poor mother! She had loved, and cherished,
and cared for him all the days of his life, and a year since he had
scarcely seen Oona; yet it was Oona's love, and not his mother's, which
had made him understand what love was. Strange injustice, yet the
injustice of nature, against which it is vain to rebel.

While Mrs. Methven, sad and anxious and perplexed, sat in the unfamiliar
room, and looked on the strange landscape in which she found no point of
sympathy, Oona in the solitude of the isle, was full of similar
thoughts. The day which had passed so miserably to Walter had gone over
her in that self-repression which is one of the chief endowments of
women, in her mother's cheerful society, and amid all the little
occupations of her ordinary life. She had not ventured to indulge
herself even in thought, unless she had been prepared, as she was not,
to open everything to Mrs. Forrester--and thus went through the hours in
that active putting aside of herself and her own concerns, which is
sometimes called hypocrisy and sometimes self-renunciation. She smiled,
and talked, and even ate against her will, that her mother might not
take fright and search into the cause, so that it was not till she had
retired into the refuge of her own room that she was at liberty to throw
herself down in all the abandonment of solitude and weep out the tears
which made her brow heavy, and think out the thoughts with which her
mind was charged almost to bursting. Her candle burned almost all the
night long, until long after the moment in which the sight of it held
Walter back from the wild flight from her and everything to which his
maddening thoughts had almost driven him.

The conflict in Oona's mind was longer, if not so violent. With an
effort she was able to dismiss herself from the consideration, and with
that entire sympathy which may mistake the facts but never the
intention, to enter into the mind of her lover. There was much that she
could not understand, and did not attempt to fathom, and the process was
not one of those that bring happiness, as when a woman, half-adoring,
follows in her own exalted imagination the high career of the hero whom
she loves. Walter was no hero, and Oona no simple worshipper to be
beguiled into that deification. She had to account to herself for the
wanderings, the contradictions, the downfalls of a man of whom she could
not think, as had been the first impulse of pain, that any woman would
satisfy him, that Katie or Oona, it did not matter which--but who it was
yet true had offered himself to Katie first, had given himself to vice
(as she remembered with a shudder) first of all, and had been roaming
wildly through life without purpose or hope. In all the absolutism of
youth to know this, and yet to recognise that the soul within may not be
corrupt, and that there may be still an agony of longing for the true
even in the midst of the false, is difficult indeed. She achieved it,
but it was not a happy effort. Bit by bit it became clearer to her. Had
she known the character of the interview with Katie, which gave her
grievous pain even when she reasoned it out and said to herself that she
understood it, the task would have been a little less hard: but it was
hard and very bitter, by moments almost more than she could bear. As she
sat by the dying fire, with her light shining so steadily, like a little
Pharos of love and steadfastness, her mind went through many faintings
and moments of darkness. To have to perceive and acknowledge that you
have given your heart and joined your life to that of a man who is no
hero, one in whom you cannot always trust that his impulses will be
right, is a discovery which is often made in after life, but by degrees,
and so gently, so imperceptibly, that love suffers but little shock.
But to make this discovery at the very outset is far more terrible than
any other obstacle that can stand in the way. Oona was compelled to face
it from the first moment almost of a union which she felt in herself no
possibility of breaking. She had given herself, and she could not
withdraw the gift any more than she could separate from him the love
which long before she had been betrayed, she knew not how, into
bestowing upon him unasked, undesired, to her own pain and shame.

As she sat all through the night and felt the cold steal upon her, into
her very heart, and the desolation of the darkness cover her while she
pondered, she was aware that this love had never failed, and knew that
to abandon him was no more possible to her than if she had been his wife
for years. The girl had come suddenly, without warning, without any
fault of hers, out of her innocence and lightheartedness, into the midst
of the most terrible problem of life. To love yet not approve, to know
that the being who is part of you is not like you, has tendencies which
are hateful to you, and a hundred imperfections which the subtlest
casuistry of love cannot justify--what terrible fate is this, that a
woman should fall into it unawares and be unable to free herself? Oona
did not think of freeing herself at all. It did not occur to her as a
possibility. How she was to bear his burden which was hers, how she was
to reconcile herself to his being as it was, or help the good in him to
development, and struggle with him against the evil, that was her
problem. Love is often tested in song and story by the ordeal of a
horrible accusation brought against the innocent, whom those who love
him, knowing his nature, stand by through all disgrace, knowing that he
cannot be guilty, and maintaining his cause in the face of all seeming
proof. How light, how easy, what an elementary lesson of affection! But
to have no such confidence, to take up the defence of the sinner who
offends no one so much as yourself, to know that the accusations are
true--that is the ordeal by fire, which the foolish believe to be
abolished in our mild and easy days. Oona saw it before her, realised
it, and made up her mind to it solemnly during that night of awe and
pain. This was her portion in the world: not simple life and happiness,
chequered only with shadows from terrible death and misfortune, such as
may befall the righteous, but miseries far other, far different, to
which misfortune and death are but easy experiments in the way of
suffering. This was to be her lot.

And yet love is so sweet! She slept towards morning, as Walter did, and
when she woke, woke to a sense of happiness so exquisite and tender that
her soul was astonished and asked why in an outburst of gratitude and
praise to God. And it was not till afterwards that the burden and all
the darkness came back to her. But that moment perhaps was worth the
pain of the other--one of those compensations, invisible to men, with
which God still comforts His martyrs. She rose from her bed and came
back to life with a face full of new gravity and thoughtfulness, yet lit
up with smiles. Even Mrs. Forrester, who had seen nothing and suspected
nothing on the previous night except that Oona had perhaps taken a
chill, felt, though she scarcely understood, a something in her face
which was beyond the ordinary level of life. She remarked to Mysie,
after breakfast, that she was much relieved to see that Miss Oona's cold
was to have no bad result. "For I think she is looking just bonnier than
usual this morning--if it is not my partiality--like a spring morning,"
Mrs. Forrester said.

"Ah mem, and mair than that," said Mysie. "God bless her! She is looking
as I have seen her look the Sabbath of the Sacrament; for she's no like
the like of us, just hardened baith to good and evil, but a' in a
tremble for sorrow and joy, when the occasion comes round."

"I hope we are not hardened," said Mrs. Forrester; "but I know what you
mean, Mysie, though you cannot perhaps express it like an educated
person; and I was afraid that she was taking one of her bad colds, and
that we should be obliged to put off our visit to Mrs. Methven--which
would have been a great pity, for I had promised to Lord Erradeen."

"Do ye not think, mem," said Mysie, "that yon young lord he is very much
taken up with--the isle and those that are on it?"

"Hoots," said Mrs. Forrester, with a smile, "with you and me, Mysie, do
you think? But that might well be after all, for I would not wonder but
he felt more at home with the like of us, that have had so much to do
with boys and young men, and all the ways of them. And you know I have
always said he was like Mr. Rob, which has warmed my heart to him from
the very first day."

Perhaps the mother was, no more than Mysie, inclined to think that she
and her old maid won the young lord's attention to the isle: but a woman
who is a girl's mother, however simple she may be, has certain innocent
wiles in this particular. Lord Erradeen would be a great match for any
other young lady on the loch, no doubt: but for Oona what prince was
good enough? They both thought so, yet not without a little flutter of
their hearts at the new idea which began to dawn.

It was once more a perfectly serene and beautiful day, a day that was
like Oona's face, adapted to that "Sabbath of the Sacrament" which is so
great a festival in rural Scotland, and brings all the distant dwellers
out of the glens and villages. About noon, when the sun was at its
height, and the last leaves on the trees seemed to reflect in their red
and yellow, and return, a dazzling response to his shining, Hamish, busy
about his fishing tackle on the beach, perceived a boat with a solitary
rower, slowly rounding the leafy corners, making a circuit of the isle.
Hamish was in no doubt as to the rower; he knew everything as well as
the two who were most closely concerned. His brow, which for the last
twenty-four hours had been full of furrows, gradually began to melt out
of those deep-drawn lines, his shaggy eyebrows smoothed out, his mouth
began to soften at the corners. There was much that was mysterious in
the whole matter, and Hamish had not been able to account to himself for
the change in the young pair who had stepped out of his boat on to the
isle in an ecstasy of happiness, and had returned sombre, under the
shadow of some sudden estrangement which he could not understand.
Neither could he understand why it was that the young lord hovered about
without attempting to land at the isle. This was so unlike the usual
custom of lovers, that not even the easy explanation, half-contemptuous,
half-respectful, which the habits of the masters furnish to their
servants, of every eccentricity, answered the occasion--and Hamish could
not but feel that there was something "out of the ordinary" in the
proceeding. But his perplexity on this subject did not diminish his
satisfaction in perceiving that the young lord was perfectly capable of
managing his boat, and that no trace of the excitement of the previous
day was visible in its regular motion, impelled now and then by a single
stroke, floating on the sunny surface of the water within sight of the
red roofs and shining windows of the house, and kept in its course out
of the way of all rocks and projecting corners by a skill which could
not, Hamish felt sure, be possessed by a disordered brain. This solaced
him beyond telling, for though he had not said a word to any one, not
even to Mysie, it had lain heavily upon his heart that Miss Oona might
be about to link her life to that of a daft man. She that was good
enough for any king! and what were the Erradeens to make so muckle work
about, but just a mad race that nobody could understand? And the late
lord had been one that could not hold an oar to save his life, nor yet
yon Underwood-man that was his chosen crony. But this lad was different!
Oh! there was no doubt that there was a great difference; just one easy
touch and he was clear of the stanes yonder, that made so little show
under the water--and there was that shallow bit where he would get
aground if he didna mind; but again a touch and that difficulty too was
cleared. It was so well done that the heart of Hamish melted altogether
into softness. And then he began to take pity upon this modest lover. He
put his hands to his mouth and gave forth a mild roar which was not more
than a whisper in kind intention.

"The leddies are at home, and will ye no land, my lord?" Hamish cried.

Lord Erradeen shook his head, and sent his boat soft gliding into a
little bay under the overhanging trees.

"Hamish," he said, "you can tell me. Are they coming to-day to
Auchnasheen?"

"At half-past two, my lord," breathed Hamish through his curved hands,
"they'll be taking the water: and it's just Miss Oona herself that has
given me my orders: and as I was saying, they could not have a bonnier
day."

It seemed to Hamish that the young lord said "Thank God!" which was
perhaps too much for the occasion, and just a thocht profane in the
circumstances; but a lord that is in love, no doubt there will be much
forgiven to him so long as he has a true heart. The sunshine caught
Hamish as he stood watching the boat which floated along the shining
surface of the water like something beatified, an emblem of divine ease,
and pleasure, and calm, and made his face shine too like the loch, and
his red shirt glow. His good heart glowed too with humble and generous
joy; they were going to be happy then, these Two; no that he was good
enough for Miss Oona; but who was good enough for Miss Oona? The
faithful fellow drew his rough hand across his eyes. He who had rowed
her about the loch since she was a child, and attended every coming and
going--he knew it would be "a sair loss," a loss never to be made up.
But then so long as she was pleased!

At half-past two they started, punctual as Mrs. Forrester always was.
Every event of this day was so important that it was remembered after
how exact they were to the minute, and in what a glory of sunshine Loch
Houran lay as they pushed out, Mysie standing on the beach to watch
them, and lending a hand herself to launch the boat. Mrs. Forrester was
well wrapped in her fur cloak with a white "cloud" about her head and
shoulders, which she declared was not at all necessary in the sunshine
which was like summer.

"It is just a June day come astray," she said, nodding and smiling to
Mysie on the beach, who thought once more of the Sacrament-day with its
subdued glory and awe, and all the pacifying influence that dwelt in
it. And Oona turned back to make a little friendly sign with hand and
head to Mysie, as the first stroke of the oars carried the boat away.

How sweet her face was; how tender her smile and bright! more sorrowful
than mirthful, like one who has been thinking of life and death, but
full of celestial and tender cheer, and a subdued happiness. Mysie stood
long looking after them, and listening to their voices which came soft
and musical over the water. She could not have told why the tears came
to her eyes. Something was about to happen, which would be joyful yet
would be sad. "None of us will stand in her way," said Mysie to herself,
unconscious of any possibility that she, the faithful servant of the
house, might be supposed to have no say in the matter; "oh, not one of
us! but what will the isle be with Miss Oona away!"




CHAPTER XIII.


Mrs. Methven had time to recover from the agitation and trouble of the
morning before her visitors' arrival. Walter's aspect had so much
changed when he appeared that her fears were calmed, though not
dispelled. He was very pale, and had an air of exhaustion, to which his
softened manners and evident endeavour to please her gave an almost
pathetic aspect. Her heart was touched, as it is easy to touch the heart
of a mother. She had watched him go out in his boat with a faint
awakening of that pleasure with which in ordinary circumstances a woman
in the retirement of age sees her children go out to their pleasure. It
gave her a satisfaction full of relief, and a sense of escape from evils
which she had feared, without knowing what she feared, to watch the
lessening speck of the boat, and to feel that her son was finding
consolation in natural and uncontaminated pleasures, in the pure air and
sky and sunshine of the morning. When he came back he was a little less
pale, though still strangely subdued and softened. He told her that she
was about to receive a visit from his nearest neighbours--"the young
lady," he added, after a pause, "who brought you across the loch."

"Miss Forrester--and her mother, no doubt? I shall be glad to see them,
Walter."

"I hope so, mother--for there is no way in which you can do me so much
good."

"You mean--this is the lady of whom you spoke to me--" Her countenance
fell a little, for what he had said to her was not reassuring; he had
spoken of one who would bring money with her, but who was not the best.

"No, mother; I have never told you what I did yesterday. I asked
that--lady of whom I spoke--to give me her money and her lands to add to
mine, and she would not. She was very right. I approved of her with all
my heart."

"Walter! my dear, you have been so--well--and so--like yourself this
morning. Do not fall into that wild way of speaking again."

"No," he said, "if all goes well--never again if all goes well;" and
with this strange speech he left her not knowing what to think. She
endeavoured to recall to her memory the half-seen face which had been by
her side crossing the dark water: but all the circumstances had been so
strange, and the loch itself had given such a sensation of alarm and
trouble to the traveller, that everything was dim like the twilight in
her recollection. A soft voice, with the unfamiliar accent of the
north, a courteous and pleasant frankness of accost, a strange sense of
thus encountering, half-unseen, some one who was no stranger, nor
unimportant in her life--these were the impressions she had brought out
of the meeting. In all things this poor lady was like a stranger
suddenly introduced into a world unknown to her, where great matters,
concerning her happiness and very existence, were hanging upon
mysterious decisions of others, unknown, and but to be guessed at
faintly through a strange language and amidst allusions which conveyed
no meaning to her mind. Thus she sat wondering, waiting for the coming
of--she could scarcely tell whom--of some one with whom she could do
more good for Walter than by anything else, yet who was not the lady to
whom he had offered himself only yesterday. Could there be any
combination more confusing? And when, amid all this mystery, as she sat
with her heart full of tremulous questions and fears, there came
suddenly into this darkling, uncomprehended world of hers the soft and
smiling certainty of Mrs. Forrester, kind and simple, and full of
innocent affectations, with her little airs of an old beauty, and her
amiable confidence in everybody's knowledge and interest, Mrs. Methven
had nearly laughed aloud with that keen sense of mingled disappointment
and relief which throws a certain ridicule upon such a scene. The sweet
gravity of Oona behind was but a second impression. The first was of
this simple, easy flood of kind and courteous commonplace, which
changed at once the atmosphere and meaning of the scene.

"We are all very glad upon the loch to hear that Lord Erradeen has got
his mother with him," said the guileless visitor, "for everything is the
better of a lady in the house. Oh, yes, you will say, that is a woman's
opinion, making the most of her own side: but you just know very well it
is true. We have not seen half so much of Lord Erradeen as we would have
liked--for in my circumstances we have very little in our power. No
gentleman in the house; and what can two ladies do to entertain a young
man, unless he will be content with his tea in the afternoon? and that
is little to ask a gentleman to. However, I must say all the neighbours
are very good-natured, and just accept what we have got to give."

"Your daughter was most kind to me when I arrived," said Mrs. Methven.
"I should have felt very lonely without her help."

"That was nothing. It was just a great pleasure to Oona, who is on the
loch from morning to night," said Mrs. Forrester. "It was a great chance
for her to be of use. We have little happening here, and the news was a
little bit of excitement for us all. You see, though I have boys of my
own, they are all of them away--what would they do here?--one in Canada,
and one in Australia, and three, as I need not say, in India--that is
where all our boys go--and doing very well, which is just all that heart
can desire. It has been a pleasure from the beginning that Lord
Erradeen reminds me so much of my Rob, who is now up with his regiment
in the north-west provinces, and a very promising young officer, though
perhaps it is not me that should say so. The complexion is different,
but I have always seen a great likeness. And now, Lord Erradeen, I hope
you will bring Mrs. Methven soon, as long as the fine weather lasts, to
the isle?"

Mrs. Methven made a little civil speech about taking the first
opportunity, but added, "I have seen nothing yet--not even this old
castle of which I have heard so much."

"It is looking beautiful this afternoon, and I have not been there
myself, I may say, for years," said Mrs. Forrester. "What would you say,
as it is so fine, to trust yourself to Hamish, who is just the most
careful man with a boat on all the loch, and take a turn as far as
Kinloch Houran with Oona and me?"

The suggestion was thrown out very lightly, with that desire to do
something for the pleasure of the stranger, which was always so strong
in Mrs. Forrester's breast. She would have liked to supplement it with a
proposal to "come home by the isle" and take a cup of tea, but refrained
for the moment with great self-denial. It was caught at eagerly by
Walter, who had not known how to introduce his mother to the sight of
the mystic place which had so much to do with his recent history: and in
a very short time they were all afloat--Mrs. Methven, half-pleased,
half-disappointed with the sudden changing of all graver thoughts and
alarms into the simplicity of a party of pleasure, so natural, so easy.
The loch was radiant with that glory of the afternoon which is not like
the glory of the morning, a dazzling world of light, the sunbeams
falling lower every moment, melting into the water, which showed all its
ripples like molten gold. The old tower lay red in the light, the few
green leaves that still fluttered on the ends of the branches, standing
out against the darker background, and the glory of the western
illumination besetting every dark corner of the broken walls as if to
take them by joyful assault and triumph over every idea of gloom.
Nothing could have been more peaceful than the appearance of this group.
The two elder ladies sat in the stern of the boat, carrying on their
tranquil conversation--Mrs. Forrester entering well pleased into details
about "the boys," which Mrs. Methven, surprised, amused, arrested
somehow, she could not tell how, in the midst of the darker, more
bewildering current, responded to now and then with some half-question,
enough to carry on the innocent fulness of the narrative. Oona, who had
scarcely spoken at all, and who was glad to be left to her own thoughts,
sat by her mother's side, with the eyes of the other mother often upon
her, yet taking no part in the talk; while Walter, placed behind Hamish
at the other end of the boat, felt this strange pause of all sensation
to be something providential, something beyond all his power of
arranging, the preface to he knew not what, but surely at least not to
any cutting off or separation from Oona. She had not indeed met his
anxious and questioning looks: but she had not refused to come, and that
of itself was much; nor did there seem to be any anger, though some
sadness, in the face which seemed to him, as to Mysie, full of sacred
light.

"No, I have not been here for long," said Mrs. Forrester; "not since the
late lord's time: but I see very little change. If you will come this
way, Mrs. Methven, it is here you will get the best view. Yon is the
tower upon which the light is seen, the light, ye will have heard, that
calls every new lord: oh and that comes many a time when there is no new
lord: You need not bid me whisht, Oona! No doubt there will be some
explanation of it: but it is a thing that all the world knows."

Mrs. Methven laughed, more at her ease than she had yet been, and said--

"Walter, what a terrible omission: you have never told me of this."

Walter did not laugh. His face, on the contrary, assumed the look of
gloom and displeasure which she knew so well.

"If you will come with me," he said to Mrs. Forrester, "I will show you
my rooms. Old Macalister is more gracious than usual. You see he has
opened the door."

"Oh I will go with great pleasure, Lord Erradeen: for it is long since I
have been inside, and I would like to see your rooms. Oh how do you do,
Macalister? I hope your wife and you are quite well, and not suffering
with rheumatism. We've come to show Mrs. Methven, that is your master's
mother, round the place. Yes, I am sure ye will all be very glad to see
her. This is Macalister, a very faithful old servant that has been with
the Lords Erradeen as long as I can remember. How long is it--near five
and forty years? Dear me, it is just wonderful how time runs on. I was
then but lately married, and never thought I would ever live like a
pelican in the wilderness in my mother's little bit isle. But your mind
just is made to your fortune, and I have had many a happy day there.
Dear me, it will be very interesting to see the rooms, we that never
thought there were any rooms. Where is Oona? Oh, never take the trouble,
Lord Erradeen, your mother is waiting: and Oona, that knows every step
of the castle, she will soon find her way."

This was how it was that Oona found herself alone. Walter cast behind
him an anxious look, but he could not desert the elder ladies, and Oona
was glad to be left behind. Her mind had recovered its calm; but she had
much to think of, and his presence disturbed her, with that influence of
personal contact which interferes with thought. She knew the old castle,
if not every step of it, as her mother said, yet enough to make it
perfectly safe for her. Old Macalister had gone first to lead the way,
to open doors and windows, that the ladies might see everything, and,
save for Hamish in his boat on the beach, there was nobody within sight
or call. The shadow of the old house shut out the sunshine from the
little platform in front of the door; but at the further side, where the
trees grew among the broken masses of the ruin, the sun from the west
entered freely. She stood for a moment undecided, then turned towards
that wild conjunction of the living and the dead, the relics of the
past, and the fresh growth of nature, which give so much charm to every
ruin. Oona went slowly, full of thought, up to the battlements, and
looked out upon the familiar landscape, full of light and freshness, and
all the natural sounds of the golden afternoon--the lapping of the water
upon the rocks, the rustle of the wind in the trees, the far-off murmurs
of life, voices cheerful, yet inarticulate, from the village, distant
sounds of horses and wheels on the unseen roads, the bark of a dog, all
the easy, honest utterance, unthought of, like simple breathing, of
common life. For a moment the voice of her own thoughts was hushed
within her, replaced by this soft combination of friendly noises. It
pleased her better to stand here with the soft air about her, than amid
all the agitation of human influences to accompany the others.

But human influence is more strong than the hold of nature; and
by-and-by she turned unconsciously from the landscape to the house, the
one dark solid mass of habitable walls, repelling the sunshine, while
the tower, with its blunted outline above, and all the fantastic
breaches and openings in the ruin, gave full play to every level ray.
The loch, all golden with the sunset, the shadows of the trees, the
breath and utterance of distant life, gave nothing but refreshment and
soothing. But the walls that were the work of men, and that for hundreds
of years had gathered sombre memories about them, had an attraction more
absorbing. A little beyond where she was standing, was the spot from
which Miss Milnathort had fallen. She had heard the story vaguely all
her life, and she had heard from Walter the meaning of it, only the
other day. Perhaps it was the sound of a little crumbling and
precipitation of dust and fragments from the further wall that brought
it so suddenly to her memory; but the circumstances in which she herself
was, were enough to bring those of the other woman, who had been as
herself, before her with all the vividness of reality. As young as
herself, and more happy, the promised bride of another Walter,
everything before her as before Oona, love and life, the best that
Providence can give, more happy than she, nothing to disturb the
gladness of her betrothal; and in a moment all over, all ended, and pain
and helplessness, and the shadow of death, substituted for her happiness
and hope. Oona paused, and thought of that tragedy with a great awe
stealing over her, and pity which was so intense in her realisation of a
story, in every point save the catastrophe, so like her own, penetrating
her very soul. She asked herself which of the two it was who had
suffered most--the faithful woman who lived to tell her own story, and
to smile with celestial patience through her death in life, or the man
who had struggled in vain, who had fallen under the hand of fate, and
obeyed the power of outward circumstances, and been vanquished, and
departed from the higher meaning of his youth? Oona thought with a
swelling and generous throbbing of her heart, of the one--but with a
deeper pang of the other; he who had not failed at all so far as any one
knew, who had lived and been happy as people say. She leant against the
wall, and asked herself if anything should befall her, such as befell
Miss Milnathort, whether her Walter would do the same. Would he accept
his defeat as the other had done, and throw down his arms and yield? She
said no in her heart, but faltered, and remembered Katie. Yet no! That
had been before, not after their hearts had met, and he had known what
was in hers. No, he might be beaten down to the dust; he might rush out
into the world, and plunge into the madness of life, or he might plunge
more deeply, more darkly, into the madness of despairing, and die. But
he would not yield; he would not throw down his arms and accept the will
of the other. Faulty as he was, and stained and prone to evil, this was
what he would never do.

And then her thoughts turned to the immediate matter before her--the
deliverance of the man whose fate she had pledged herself to share
notwithstanding all his imperfections; he who had found means already,
since she had bound herself to him, to make her heart bleed; he whom she
had loved against her will, against her judgment, before she was aware.
He was to be made free from a bondage, a spiritual persecution, a tyrant
who threatened him in every action of his life. Oona had known all her
life that there was some mysterious oppression under which the house of
Erradeen was bound, and there was no scepticism in her mind in respect
to a wonder about which every inhabitant of the district had something
to say; but from the moment when it became apparent that she too was to
belong to this fated house, it had become insupportable and impossible.
She felt, but with less agitation and a calmer certainty than that of
Walter, that by whatsoever means it must be brought to an end. Had he
been able to bear it, she could not have borne it. And he said that she
alone could save him--that with her by his side he was safe; strange
words, containing a flattery which was not intended, a claim which could
not be resisted. He had said it when as yet he scarcely knew her, he had
repeated it when he came to her hot from the presence of the other to
whom he had appealed in vain. Strange mixture of the sweet and the
bitter! She remembered, however, that he had asked her in the simplicity
of desperation to give him her hand to help him, a year ago, and this
thought banished all the other circumstances from her mind. She had
helped him then, knowing nothing--how was she to help him now? Could she
but do it by standing forth in his place and meeting his enemy for him!
could she but take his burden on her shoulders and carry it for him! He
who had suffered so much feared with a deadly terror his oppressor; but
Oona did not fear him. On her he had no power. In Walter's mind there
was the weakness of previous defeat, the tradition of family subjection;
but in her there was no such weakness, either personal or traditionary;
and what was the use of her innocence, of her courage, if not to be used
in his cause? Could she but stand for him, speak for him, take his
place!

    "Up and spoke she, Alice Brand,
      And made the holy sign;
    And if there's blood on Richard's hand,
      A stainless hand is mine."

Oona's heart was full of this high thought. It drove away from her mind
all shadows, all recollections of a less exalting kind. She moved on
quietly, not caring nor thinking where she went, forming within herself
visions of this substitution, which is in so many cases a woman's
warmest desire.

But then she paused, and there became visible to her a still higher
eminence of generous love--a higher giddy eminence, more precarious,
more dangerous, by which deliverance was less secure; not
substitution--that was impossible. In her inward thoughts she blushed to
feel that she had thought of a way of escape which for Walter would have
been ignoble. It was for him to bear his own part, not to stand by while
another did it for him. A noble shame took possession of her that she
could for a moment have conceived another way. But with this came back
all the anxious thoughts, the questions, the uncertainty. How was she to
help him? how pour all the force of her life into him? how transfer to
him every needed quality, and give him the strength of two in one?

In the full current of her thoughts Oona was suddenly brought to a
pause. It was by the instinct of self-preservation which made her start
back on the very edge of the ruin. The sickening sensation with which
she felt the crumbling masonry move beneath her foot, drove everything
out of her mind for the moment. With a sudden recoil upon herself, Oona
set her back against the edge of the parapet that remained, and
endeavoured to command and combat the sudden terror that seized hold
upon her. She cast a keen wild look round her to find out if there was
any way of safety, and called out for help, and upon Walter! Walter!
though she felt it was vain. The wind was against her, and caught her
voice, carrying it as if in mockery down the loch, from whence it
returned only in a vague and distant echo; and she perceived that the
hope of any one hearing and reaching her was futile indeed. Above her,
on a range of ruin always considered inaccessible, there seemed to Oona
a line of masonry solid enough to give her footing. Necessity cannot
wait for precedents. She was young and active, and used to exercise, and
her nerves were steadied by the strain of actual danger. She made a
spring from her insecure standing, feeling the ruin give way under her
foot with the impulse, and with the giddiness of a venture which was
almost desperate, flung herself upon the higher level. When she had got
there it seemed to her incredible that she could have done it: and what
was to be her next step she knew not, for the ledge on which she stood
was very narrow, and there was nothing to hold by in case her head or
courage should fail. Everything below and around was shapeless ruin, not
to be trusted, all honeycombed, with hollow places thinly covered over
by remains of fallen roofs and drifted earth and treacherous vegetation.
Only in one direction was there any appearance of solidity, and that was
above her towards the tower which still stood firmly, the crown of the
building, though no one had climbed up to its mysterious heights within
the memory of man. Round it was a stone balcony or terrace, which was
the spot upon which the mysterious light, so familiar to her, was
periodically visible. Oona's heart beat as she saw herself within reach
of this spot. She had watched it so often from the safe and peaceful
isle, with that thrill of awe, and wonder, and half-terror, which gave
an additional pleasure to her own complete and perfect safety. She made
a few steps forward, and, putting out her hand with a quiver of all her
nerves, took hold upon the cold roughness of the lower ledge. The touch
steadied her, yet woke an agitation in her frame, the stir of strong
excitement; for death lay below her, and her only refuge was in the very
home of mystery, a spot untrodden of men. For the next few minutes she
made her way instinctively without thought, holding by every projection
which presented itself; but when Oona found herself standing safe within
the balustrade, close upon the wall of the tower, and had drawn breath
and recovered a little from the exhaustion and strain--when her mind got
again the upper hand and disentangled itself from the agitation of the
body, the hurry and whirl of all her thoughts were beyond description.
She paused as upon the threshold of a new world. What might be about to
happen to her? not to perish like the other, which seemed so likely a
few minutes ago, yet perhaps as tragic a fate; perhaps the doom of all
connected with the Methvens was here awaiting her.

But there is something in every extreme which disposes the capricious
human soul to revolt and recoil. Oona still spoke to herself, but spoke
aloud, as it was some comfort to do in her utter isolation. She laughed
to herself, nature forcing its way through awe and alarm. "Doom!" she
said to herself, "there is no doom. That would mean that God was no
longer over all. What He wills let that be done." This calmed her nerves
and imagination. She did not stop to say any prayer for her own safety.
There arose even in her mind upon the very foundation of her momentary
panic, a sudden new force and hope. She who had so desired to stand in
Walter's place, to be his substitute, might not this, without any plan
or intention of hers, be now placed within her power?

In the mean time everything was solid and safe beneath her feet. The
tower stood strong, the pavement of the narrow platform which surrounded
it was worn by time and weather, but perfectly secure. Here and there a
breach in the balustrade showed like fantastic flamboyant work, but a
regiment might have marched round it without disturbing a stone. Oona's
excitement was extreme. Her heart beat in her ears like the roaring of a
torrent. She went on, raised beyond herself, with a strange conviction
that there was some object in her coming, and that this which seemed so
accidental was no accident at all, but perhaps--how could she tell?--an
ordeal, the first step in that career which she had accepted. She put
her hand upon the wall, and guided herself by it, feeling a support in
the rough and time-worn surface, the stones which had borne the assault
of ages. Daylight was still bright around her, the last rays of the sun
dazzling the loch below, which in its turn lent a glory of reflection to
the sky above, and sent up a golden sheen through the air from the blaze
upon the water. Round the corner of the tower the wind blew freshly in
her face from the hills, reviving and encouraging her. Nature was on her
side in all its frankness and reality whatever mystery might be
elsewhere. When she had turned the corner of the tower, and saw beneath
her the roofs of Auchnasheen visible among the trees, Oona suddenly
stood still, her heart making, she thought, a pause as well as her feet;
then with a bound beginning again in louder and louder pulsation. She
had come to a doorway deep set in the wall, like the entrance of a
cavern, with one broad, much-worn step, and a heavy old door bound and
studded with iron. She stood for a moment uncertain, trembling, with a
sense of the unforeseen and extraordinary which flew to her brain--a
bewildering pang of sensation. For a moment she hesitated what to do:
yet scarcely for a moment, since by this time she began to feel the
force of an impulse which did not seem her own, and which she had no
strength to resist. The door was slightly ajar, and pushing it open,
Oona found herself, with another suffocating pause, then bound, of her
heart, upon the threshold of a richly furnished room. She was aware of
keeping her hold upon the door with a terrifying anticipation of hearing
it close upon her, but otherwise seemed to herself to have passed beyond
her own control and consciousness, and to be aware only of the wonderful
scene before her. The room was lighted from an opening in the roof,
which showed in the upper part the rough stone of the walls in great
blocks, rudely hewn, contrasting strangely with the heavy curtains with
which they were hung round below. The curtains seemed of velvet, with
panels of tapestry in dim designs here and there: the floor was covered
with thick and soft carpets. A great telescope occupied a place in the
centre of the room, and various fine instruments, some looking like
astronomical models, stood on tables about. The curtained walls were
hung with portraits, one of which she recognised as that of the last
Lord Erradeen. And in the centre of all supported on a table with a
lamp burning in front of it, the light of which (she supposed), blown
about by the sudden entrance of the air, so flickered upon the face that
the features seemed to change and move, was the portrait of Walter. The
cry which she would have uttered at this sight died in Oona's throat.
She stood speechless, without power to think, gazing, conscious that
this discovery was not for nothing, that here was something she must do,
but unable to form a thought. The light fell upon the subdued colours of
the hangings and furniture with a mystic paleness, without warmth; but
the atmosphere was luxurious and soft, with a faint fragrance in it.
Oona held open the door, which seemed in the movement of the air which
she had admitted, to struggle with her, but to which she held with a
desperate grasp, and gazed spellbound. Was it the flickering of the
lamp, or was it possible that the face of the portrait changed, that
anguish came into the features, and that the eyes turned and looked at
her appealing, full of misery, as Walter's eyes had looked? It seemed to
Oona that her senses began to fail her. There was a movement in the
tapestry, and from the other side of the room, some one put it aside,
and after looking at her for a moment came slowly out. She had seen him
only in the night and darkness, but there was not another such that she
should mistake who it was. A thrill ran through her of terror,
desperation, and daring. Whatever might now be done or said, Oona had
come to the crisis of her fate.

He came towards her with the air of courtesy and grace, which seemed his
most characteristic aspect. "Come in," he said; "to reach this place
requires a stout heart; but you are safe here."

Oona made him no reply. She felt her voice and almost her breathing
arrested in her throat, and felt capable of nothing but to hold fast to
the heavy door, which seemed to struggle with her like a living thing.

"You are afraid," he said; "but there is no reason to fear. Why should
you think I would injure you? You might have fallen, like others, from
the ruin; but you are safe here."

He advanced another step and held out his hand. It seemed to Oona that
the door crushed her as she stood against it, but she would not let go
her hold; and with all her power she struggled to regain possession of
her voice, but could not, paralysed by some force which she did not
understand.

He smiled with a slight ridicule in his lofty politeness. "I tell you
not to fear," he said. "Yours is not a spirit to fear; you who would
have put yourself in his place and defied the demon. You find me no
demon, and I offer no hostility, yet you are afraid."

Oona was astonished by the sound of her own voice, which burst forth
suddenly, by no apparent will of her own, and which was strange to her,
an unfamiliar tone, "I am not afraid--I am in--the protection of God--"

He laughed softly. "You mean to exorcise me," he said; "but that is not
so easily done; and I warn you that resistance is not the best way. You
have trusted yourself to me--"

"No--no--"

"Yes. You fled from the danger to which another in your place succumbed,
and you have taken refuge with me. To those who do so I am bound. Come
in; there is no danger here."

It seemed to Oona that there were two beings in her--one which ridiculed
her distrust, which would have accepted the hand held out; another--not
her, surely, not her frank and unsuspicious self--who held back and
clung in terror to the door. She stammered, hearing even in her voice
the same conflict, some tones that were her own, some shrill that were
not hers--"I want no protection--but God's."

"Why then," he said with a smile, "did you not remain among the ruins?
What brought you here?"

There was an answer--a good answer if she could have found it--but she
could not find it, and made no reply.

"You refuse my friendship, then," he said, "which is a pity, for it
might have saved you much suffering. All the same, I congratulate you
upon your prize."

These last words stopped the current towards him of that natural
sentiment of confidence and faith in her fellow-creatures, which was
Oona's very atmosphere. Her prize! What did he mean by her prize?

"There could not be anything more satisfactory to your friends," he
said. "A title--large estates--a position which leaves nothing to be
desired. Your mother must be fully satisfied, and your brothers at the
ends of the world will all feel the advantage. Other conquests might
have been better for the Erradeens, but for you nothing could be more
brilliant. It was a chance too, unlikely, almost past hoping for, thus
to catch a heart in the rebound."

She stood aghast, gazing with eyes that were pained by the strain, but
which would not detach themselves from his face. Brilliant! advantages!
Was she in a dream? or what was the meaning of the words?

"It is against my own policy," he continued, "as perhaps you know; still
I cannot help admiring your skill, unaided, against every drawback. You
have a strong mind, young lady of the isle, and the antecedents which
would have daunted most women have been allies and auxiliaries to you."
His laugh was quite soft and pleasant, sounding like gentle amusement,
not ridicule. "I know your family," he continued, "of old. They were all
men of strong stomachs, able to swallow much so long as their own
interest was concerned. With Highland caterans, that is comprehensible;
but one so young as you--named like you--after--" he laughed again that
low soft laugh of amusement as if at something which tickled him in
spite of himself, "the emblem of purity and innocence--'heavenly Una
with her milk-white lamb.'"

"You want," said Oona, whose voice sounded hoarse in her throat, and
sharp to her own ears, "to make me mad with your taunts; to make me give
up--"

"Pardon me, I am only congratulating you," he said, and smiled, looking
at her with a penetrating look of amusement and that veiled ridicule
which does not infringe the outward forms of politeness. She gazed back
at him with eyes wide open, with such a pang of wondering anguish and
shame in her heart as left her speechless; for what he said was true.
She had thought of her union with Walter in many ways before, but never
in this. Now it all flashed upon her as by a sudden light. What he said
was true. She who had never given a thought to worldly advantage, had
nevertheless secured it as much as if that had been her only thought.
Her senses seemed to fail her in the whirl and heart-sickness of the
revelation. It was true. She who had believed herself to be giving all,
she was taking to herself rank, wealth, and honour, in marrying Walter.
And giving to him what?--a woman's empty hand; no more. Oona was very
proud though she did not know it, and the blow fell upon her with
crushing effect. Every word had truth in it; her mother would be
satisfied; the family would profit by it wherever they were scattered;
and she would be the first to reap the advantage.

Oona felt everything swim around her as in the whirl and giddiness of a
great fall. Her fall was greater than that of Miss Milnathort, for it
was the spirit not the body that was crushed and broken. She could not
lift up her head. A horrible doubt even of herself came into her mind
in her sudden and deep humiliation. Had this been in her thoughts though
she did not know it? No stroke could have been aimed at her so
intolerable as this.

He kept his eyes upon her, as if with a secret enjoyment of her
overthrow. "You do not thank me for my congratulations," he cried.

"Oh!" she cried in the wondering self-abandonment of pain, "can you be a
man, only a man, and strike so deep?" Then the very anguish of her soul
gave her a sudden inspiration. She looked round her with her eyes
dilating. "When you can do this," she said, putting with unconscious
eloquence her hand to her heart, "what do you want with things like
those?" The sight of the lamp which burned before Walter's portrait had
given her a painful sense of harm and danger when she saw it first. It
filled her now with a keen disdain. To be able to pierce the very soul,
and yet to use the aid of _that_! She did not know what its meaning was,
yet suffering in every nerve, she scorned it, and turned to him with a
questioning look which was full of indignation and contempt.

And he who was so strong, so much above her in power and knowledge,
shrank--almost imperceptibly, but yet he shrank--startled, from her look
and question. "_That?_" he said, "you who know so little of your own
mind, how can you tell how human nature is affected?--by what poor
methods, as well as by great. You understand nothing--not yourself--far
less the devices of the wise."

"Oh, you are wise," cried Oona, "and cruel. You can make what is best
look the worst. You can confuse our souls so that we cannot tell what is
good in us, and what evil. I know, I know, you are a great person. Yet
you hide and lurk in this place which no man knows; and work by spells
and charms like--like--"

"Like what?" a gleam of anger and shame--or of something that might have
betrayed these sentiments on any other face--crossed his usually calm
and lofty countenance. Oona, opposite to him, returned his look with a
passionate face of indignation and disdain. She had forgotten herself
altogether, and everything but the thrill and throbbing of the anguish
which seemed to have taken the place of her heart in her. She feared
nothing now. The blow which she had received had given her the nobleness
of desperation.

"Like a poor--witch," she said; "like the wizard they call you; like one
who plays upon the ignorant, not like the powerful spirit you are. You
that can beat us down to the dust, both him and me. You that can turn
sweet into bitter, and good into evil. Oh, how can you for shame take
that way too, like a--juggler," she cried in her passion; "like a
sorcerer; like----"

"You speak like a fool, though you are no fool," he said, "not knowing
the stuff that we are made of." He made a step towards her as he spoke,
and though his tone was rather sad than fierce, there came upon Oona in
a moment such a convulsion of terror as proved what the weakness was of
which he spoke. She clung with all her failing force to the door which
seemed her only support, and broke out into a shrill cry, "Walter,
Walter, save me!" afraid of she knew not what, panic seizing her, and
the light flickering in her fainting eyes.




CHAPTER XIV.


While Oona was standing on the verge of these mysteries a trial of a
very different kind had fallen to Walter. They had exchanged parts in
this beginning of their union. It was his to lead the two elder ladies
into those rooms which were to him connected with the most painful
moments of his life, but to them conveyed no idea beyond the matter of
fact that they were more comfortably furnished and inhabitable than was
to be expected in such a ruin. Even to Mrs. Methven, who was
interrogating his looks all the time, in an anxious endeavour to know
what his feelings were, there seemed nothing extraordinary in the place
save this. She seated herself calmly in the chair, which he had seen
occupied by so different a tenant, and looking smiling towards him,
though always with a question in her eyes, began to express her wonder
why, with Auchnasheen so near, it had been thought necessary to retain a
dwelling-place among these ruins; but since Walter did from time to time
inhabit them, his mother found it pleasant that they were so habitable,
so almost comfortable, and answered old Macalister's apologies for the
want of a fire or any preparations for their coming with smiling
assurances that all was very well, that she could not have hoped to find
rooms in such careful repair. Mrs. Forrester was a great deal more
effusive, and examined everything with a flow of cheerful remark,
divided between Lord Erradeen and his old servant, with whom, as with
everybody on the loch, she had the acquaintance of a lifetime.

"I must see your wife, Macalister," she said, "and make her my
compliment on the way she has kept everything. It is really just a
triumph, and I would like to know how she has done it. To keep down the
damp even in my little house, where there are always fires going, and
every room full, is a constant thought--and how she does it here, where
it is so seldom occupied----. The rooms are just wonderfully nice rooms,
Lord Erradeen, but I would not say they were a cheerful dwelling--above
all, for a young man like you."

"No, they are not a very cheerful dwelling," said Walter with a smile,
which to his mother, watching him so closely, told a tale of pain which
she did not understand indeed, yet entered into with instinctive
sympathy. The place began to breathe out suffering and mystery to her,
she could not tell why. It was cold, both in reality and sentiment, the
light coming into it from the cold north-east, from the mountains which
stood up dark and chill above the low shining of the setting sun. And
the cold affected her from his eyes, and made her shiver.

"I think," she said, "we must not stay too long. The sun is getting low,
and the cold----"

"But where is Oona?" said Mrs. Forrester. "I would not like to go away
till she has had the pleasure too. Oh, yes, it is a pleasure, Lord
Erradeen--for you see we cannot look out at our own door, without the
sight of your old castle before our eyes, and it is a satisfaction to
know what there is within. She must have stayed outside among the rains
that she was always partial to. Perhaps Macalister will go and look for
her--or, oh! Lord Erradeen, but I could not ask you to take that
trouble."

"My lord," said old Macalister aside, "if it had been any other young
lady I wad have been after her before now. Miss Oona is just wonderful
for sense and judgment; but when I think upon yon wall----"

"I will go," said Walter. Amid all the associations of this place, the
thought of Oona had threaded through every movement of his mind. He
thought now that she had stayed behind out of sympathy, now that it was
indifference, now--he could not tell what to think. But no alarm for her
safety had crossed his thoughts. He made a rapid step towards the door,
then paused, with a bewildering sense that he was leaving two innocent
women without protection in a place full of dangers which they knew
nothing of. Was it possible that his enemy could assail him through
these unsuspecting simple visitors? He turned back to them with a
strange pang of pity and regret, which he himself did not understand.
"Mother," he said, "you will forgive me--it is only for a moment?"

"Walter!" she cried, full of surprise; then waved her hand to him with a
smile, bidding him, "Go, go--and bring Miss Forrester." Her attitude,
her smile of perfect security and pleasure, went with him like a little
picture, as he went down the spiral stairs. Mrs. Forrester was in the
scene too, in all her pretty faded colour and animation, begging
him--"Dear me, not to take the trouble; for no doubt Oona was just at
the door, or among the ruins, or saying a word to Hamish about the
boat." A peaceful little picture--no shadow upon it; the light a little
cold, but the atmosphere so serene and still. Strange contrast to all
that he had seen there--the conflict, the anguish, which seemed to have
left their traces upon the very walls.

He hurried down-stairs with this in his mind, and a lingering of all his
thoughts upon the wistful smiling of his mother's face--though why at
this moment he should dwell upon that was a wonder to himself. Oona was
not on the grassy slope before the door, nor talking to Hamish at the
landing-place, as her mother suggested. There was no trace of her among
the ruins. Then, but not till then, Walter began to feel a tremor of
alarm. There came suddenly into his mind the recollection of that
catastrophe of which he had been told in Edinburgh by its victim; it
sent a shiver through him, but even yet he did not seriously fear; for
Oona was no stranger to lose herself upon the dangerous places of the
ruin. He went hurriedly up the steps to the battlements, where he
himself had passed through so many internal struggles, thinking nothing
less than to find her in one of the embrasures, where he had sat and
looked out upon the loch. He had been startled as he came out of the
shadow of the house, by a faint cry, which seemed to issue from the
distance, from the other extremity of the water, and which was indeed
the cry for help to which Oona had given utterance when she felt the
wall crumbling under her feet, which the wind had carried far down the
loch, and which came back in a distant echo. Walter began to remember
this cry as he searched in vain for any trace of her. And when he
reached the spot where the danger began and saw the traces that some
other steps had been there before him, and that a shower of crumbling
mortar and fragments of stone had fallen, his heart leaped to his throat
with sudden horror. This was calmed by the instant reassurance that had
she fallen he must at once have discovered the catastrophe. He looked
round him bewildered, unable to conceive what had become of her. Where
had she gone? The boat lay at the landing-place, with Hamish in waiting;
the whole scene full of rest and calm, and everything silent about and
around. "Oona!" he cried, but the wind caught his voice too, and carried
it away to the village on the other bank, to her own isle away upon the
glistening water, where Oona was not. Where was she? His throat began to
grow parched, his breath to labour with the hurry of his heart. He
stood on the verge of the precipice of broken masonry, straining his
eyes over the stony pinnacles above, and the sharp irregularities of the
ruin. There he saw something suddenly which made his heart stand still:
her glove lying where she had dropped it in her hurried progress along
the ledge. He did not pause to think how she got there, which would have
seemed at another moment impossible, but with a desperate spring and a
sensation as of death in his heart, followed, where she had passed,
wherever that might be.

Walter neither knew where he was going nor how he made his way along
those jagged heights. He did not go cautiously as Oona had done, but
flew on, taking no notice of the dangers of the way. The sound of
voices, and of his own name, and Oona's cry for help, reached his ear as
with a leap he gained the stone balcony of the tower. His feet scarcely
touched the stones as he flew to her who called him, nor did he think
where he was, or feel any wonder at the call, or at the voices on such a
height, or at anything that was happening. His mind had no room for any
observation or thought save that Oona called him. He flung himself into
the dark doorway as if it had been a place he had known all his life,
and caught her as her strength failed her. She who had thought she could
put herself in his place, and who had been ready to brave everything for
him, turned round with her eyes glazing and her limbs giving way, with
strength enough only to throw herself upon his breast. Thus Walter
found himself once more face to face with his enemy. The last time they
had met, Lord Erradeen had been goaded almost to madness. He stood now
supporting Oona on his arm, stern, threatening in his turn.

"If you have killed her," he cried; "if you have hurt her as you did
before; if you have made her your victim, as you did before!" There was
no shrinking in his look now: he spoke out loudly with his head high,
his eyes blazing upon the enemy who was no longer his, but _hers_, which
had a very different meaning; and though he stood against the door where
he had found Oona holding it wide open, this was done unconsciously,
with no idea of precaution. The time for that was over now.

And with the sensation of his support, the throb of his heart so near
hers, Oona came back to herself. She turned slowly round towards the
inhabitant of the tower. "Walter, tell him--that though he can make us
miserable he cannot make us consent. Tell him--that now we are two, not
one, and that our life is ours, not his. Oh!" she cried, lifting her
eyes, addressing herself directly to him, "listen to me!--over me you
have no power--and Walter is mine, and I am his. Go--leave us in peace."

"She says true; leave us in peace. In all my life now, I shall do no act
that is not half hers, and over her you have no power."

"You expect me then," he said, "to give way to this bargain of
self-interest--a partnership of protection to you and gain to her. And
you think that before this I am to give way."

"It is not so," cried Walter, "not so. Oona, answer him. I turned to her
for help because I loved her, and she to me for--I know not why--because
she loved me. Answer him, Oona! if it should be at this moment for death
not for life--"

She turned to him with a look and a smile, and put her arm through his,
clasping his hand: then turned again to the other who stood looking on.
"If it should be for death," she said.

There was a moment of intense stillness. He before whom these two stood
knew human nature well. He knew every way in which to work upon a
solitary being, a soul alone, in his power; but he knew that before two,
awake, alive, on the watch one for the other, these methods were without
power, and though his experiences were so great the situation was new.
They were in the first absolute devotion of their union, invulnerable,
no germ of distrust, no crevice of possible separation. He might kill,
but he could not move them. This mysterious agent was not above the
artifices of defeat. To separate them was the only device that remained
to him.

"You are aware," he said, "that here if nowhere else you are absolutely
in my power. You have come to me. I have not gone to you. If you wish to
sacrifice her life you can do so, but what right have you to do it? How
dare you take her from those who love her, and make her your victim? She
will be your victim, not mine. There is time yet for her to escape. It
is for her to go--Die? why should she die? Are you worth such a
sacrifice? Let her go----"

"Hold me fast--do not loose me, Walter," cried Oona wildly in his ear.

And here his last temptation took him, in the guise of love, and rent
him in two. To let _her_ perish, was that possible? Could he hold her
though she was his life, and sacrifice hers? Walter could not pause to
think; he tore his hand out of hers, which would not be loosed, and
thrust her from him. "Oona," he cried, his voice sinking to a whisper,
"go! Oona, go! Not to sacrifice you--no, no, I will not. Anything but
that. While there is time, go!"

She stood for a moment between the two, deserted, cast off by him who
loved her. It was the supreme crisis of all this story of her heart. For
a moment she said nothing, but looked at them, meeting the keen gaze of
the tempter, whose eyes seemed to burn her, gazing at Walter who had
half-closed his not to see her go. Then with the sudden, swift,
passionate action, unpremeditated and impulsive, which is natural to
women, she flung herself before him, and seized with her hands the table
upon which the light was burning. "You said," she cried, breathless,
"that you used small methods as well as great--and this is one, whatever
it is." She thrust it from her violently as she spoke. The lamp fell
with a great crash and broke, and the liquid which had supplied it burst
out and ran blazing in great globules of flames over the floor. The
crash, the blaze, the sudden uproar, was like a wall between the
antagonists. The curtains swaying with the wind, the old dry tapestries,
caught in the fire like tinder. Oona, as wild with fear as she had been
with daring, caught at Walter's hand with the strength of despair, and
fled dragging him after her. The door clanged behind them as he let it
go, then burst open again with the force of the breeze and let out a
great blaze, the red mad gleam of fire in the sunshine and
daylight--unnatural, devouring. With a sense that death was in their way
before and behind, they went forth clinging to each other,
half-stupefied, half-desperate. Then sense and hearing and consciousness
itself were lost in a roar as of all the elements let loose--a great
dizzy upheaving as of an earthquake. The whole world darkened round
them; there was a sudden rush of air and whirl of giddy sensation--and
nothing more.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two mothers meanwhile talked calmly in the room below, where
Macalister had lighted the fire, and where, in the cheerful blaze and
glow, everything became more easy and tranquil and calm. Perhaps even
the absence of the young pair, whose high strain of existence at the
moment could not but disturb the elder souls with sympathy, made the
quiet waiting, the pleasant talk, more natural. Mrs. Methven had been
deeply touched by her son's all unneeded apology for leaving her. She
could have laughed over it, and cried, it was so kind, so tender of
Walter, yet unlike him, the late awakening of thought and tenderness to
which she had never been accustomed, which penetrated her with a sweet
and delightful amusement as well as happiness. She had no reason to
apprehend any evil, neither was Mrs. Forrester afraid for Oona. "Oh no,
she is well used to going about by herself. There is nobody near but
knows my Oona. Her family and all her belongings have been on the loch,
I might say, since ever it was a loch; and if any stranger took it upon
him to say an uncivil word, there is neither man nor woman for ten miles
round but would stand up for her--if such a thing could be," Mrs.
Forrester added with dignity, "which is just impossible and not to be
thought of. And as for ruins, she knows them well. But I would like her
to see the books, and what a nice room Lord Erradeen has here, for often
we have been sorry for him, and wondered what kind of accommodation
there was, and what good it could do to drag the poor young man out of
his comfortable house, if it was only once in the year----"

"And why should he come here once in the year?" Mrs. Methven asked with
a smile.

"That is just the strange story: but I could not take upon myself to
say, for I know nothing except the common talk, which is nonsense, no
doubt. You will never have been in the north before?" said Mrs.
Forrester, thinking it judicious to change the subject.

"Never before," Mrs. Methven replied, perceiving equally on her side
that the secrets of the family were not to be gleaned from a stranger;
and she added, "My son himself has not yet seen his other houses, though
this is the second time he has come here."

"It is to be hoped," said the other, "that now he will think less of
that weary London, which I hear is just an endless traffic of parties
and pleasure--and settle down to be a Scots lord. We must make excuses
for a young man that naturally likes to be among his own kind, and finds
more pleasure in an endless on-going than ladies always understand.
Though I will not say but I like society very well myself, and would be
proud to see my friends about me, if it were not for the quiet way that
Oona and I are living, upon a little bit isle, which makes it always
needful to consider the weather, and if there is a moon, and all that;
and besides that, I have no gentleman in the house."

"I never had a daughter," said Mrs. Methven; "there can be no companion
so sweet."

"You mean Oona? Her and me," said Mrs. Forrester, with Scotch grammar
and a smile, "we are but one; and you do not expect me to praise myself?
When I say we have no gentleman in the house, it is because we cannot be
of the use we would wish to our friends. To offer a cup of tea is just
all I have in my power, and that is nothing to ask a gentleman to; but
for all that it is wonderful how constantly we are seeing our
neighbours, especially in the summer time, when the days are long. But
bless me, what is that?" Mrs. Forrester cried. The end of her words was
lost in a tumult and horror of sound such as Loch Houran had never heard
before.




CHAPTER XV.


The explosion startled the whole country for miles around.

The old castle was at all times the centre of the landscape, standing
sombre in its ruin amid all the smiling existence of to-day. It flashed
in a moment into an importance more wonderful, blazing up to the sky in
fire and flame and clouds of smoke like a great battle. The whole
neighbourhood, as far as sight could carry, saw this new wonder, and
sprang into sudden excitement, alarm, and terror. Every soul rushed out
of the village on the bank; servants appeared half frantic in front of
Auchnasheen, pushing out in skiffs and fishing-cobbles upon the water
which seemed to share the sudden passion of alarm, and became but one
great reflection, red and terrible, of the flames which seemed to burst
in a moment from every point. Some yachtsmen, whose little vessel had
been lying at anchor, and who had been watching with great curiosity the
moving figures on the height of the gallery round the tower, with much
laughing discussion among themselves as to the possibility of having
seen the ghost--were suddenly brought to seriousness in a moment as the
yacht bounded under their feet with the concussion of the air, and the
idle sail flapping from the mast grew blood-red in the sudden glare. It
was the work of another moment to leap into their boat and speed as fast
as the oars could plough through the water, to the rescue, if rescue
were needed. Who could be there? they asked each other. Only old
Macalister with his wife, who, safe in the lower story, would have full
time to escape. But then, what were those figures on the tower? The
young men almost laughed again as they said to each other, "The warlock
lord!" "Let's hope he's blown himself up and made an end of all that
nonsense," said the sceptic of the party. But just then the stalwart
boat-load came across a wild skiff dashing through the water, old
Symington like a ghost in the stern, and red-haired Duncan, with bare
arms and throat, rowing as for life and death.

"My lord is there!" cried the old man with quivering lips, "The leddies
are there!"

"And Hamish and Miss Oona!" fell stammering from Duncan, half dumb with
horror.

The young yachtsmen never said a word, but looked at each other and flew
along over the blood-red water. Oona! It was natural they should think
of her first in her sweetness and youth.

The two mothers in their tranquil talk sat still for a moment and looked
at each other with pale awe on their faces, when that wild tumult
enveloped them, paralysing every other sense. They thought they were
lost, and instinctively put out their hands to each other. They were
alone--even the old servant had left them--and there they sat
breathless, expecting death. For a moment the floor and walls so
quivered about them that this alone seemed possible; but nothing
followed, and their faculties returned. They rose with one impulse and
made their way together to the door--then, the awe of death passing,
life rising in them, flew down the stair-case with the lightness of
youth, and out to the air, which already was full of the red flashes of
the rising flames. But once there, a worse thing befell these two poor
women. They had been still in the face of death, but now, with life
saved, came a sense of something more terrible than death. They cried
out in one voice the names of their children. "My boy!" "Oona!" Old
Macalister, speechless, dragging his old wife after him, came out and
joined them, the two old people looking like owls suddenly scared by the
outburst of lurid light.

"Oh, what will be happening?" said the old woman, her dazed astonishment
contrasting strangely with the excitement and terror of the others.

Mrs. Forrester answered her with wild and feverish volubility.

"Nothing will have happened," she said. "Oona, my darling! What would
happen? She knows her way: she would not go a step too far. Oh, Oona,
where are you? why will you not answer me? They will just be bewildered
like ourselves, and she will be in a sore fright; but that will be for
me. Oona! Oona! She will be frightened--but only for me. Oona! Oh
Hamish, man, can ye not find your young lady? The fire--I am not afraid
of the fire. She will just be wild with terror--for me. Oona! Oona!
Oona!" cried the poor lady, her voice ending in a shriek.

Mrs. Methven stood by her side, but did not speak. Her pale face was
raised to the flaming tower, which threw an illumination of red light
over everything. She did not know that it was supposed to be
inaccessible. For anything she knew, her boy might be there perishing
within her sight; and she could do nothing. The anguish of the helpless
and hopeless gave her a sort of terrible calm. She looked at the flames
as she might have looked at executioners who were putting her son to
death. She had no hope.

Into the midst of this distracted group came a sudden rush of men from
the boats, which were arriving every minute, the young yachtsmen at
their head. Mrs. Forrester flung herself upon these young men, catching
hold of them as they came up.

"My Oona's among the ruins," she said breathlessly. "Oh, no fear but
you'll find her. Oh, find her! find her! for I'm going out of my senses,
I think. I know that she's safe, oh, quite safe! but I'm silly, silly,
and my nerves are all wrong. Oh, Harry, for the love of God, and
Patrick, Patrick, my fine lad! And not a brother to look after my
bairn!"

"We are all her brothers," cried the youths, struggling past the poor
lady, who clung to them and hindered their progress, her voice coming
shrill through the roar of the flames and the bustle and commotion
below. Amid this tumult her piercing "Oona! Oona!" came in from time to
time, sharp with the derision of tragedy for anything so ineffectual and
vain. Before many minutes had passed the open space in front of the
house which stood intact and as yet unthreatened, was crowded with men,
none of them, however, knowing what to do, nor, indeed, what had
happened. The information that Lord Erradeen and Oona were missing was
handed about among them, repeated with shakings of the head to every
new-comer. Mrs. Methven standing in the midst, whom nobody knew,
received all the comments like so many stabs into her heart. "Was it
them that were seen on the walls just before? Then nothing could have
saved them." "The wall's all breached to the loch: no cannon could have
done it cleaner. It's there you'll find them." "Find them! Oh, hon, oh,
hon! the bodies of them. Let's hope their souls are in a better place."
The unfortunate mother heard what everybody said. She stood among
strangers, with nobody who had any compassion upon her, receiving over
and over again the assurance of his fate.

The first difficulty here, as in every other case of the kind, was that
no one knew what to do; there were hurried consultations, advices called
out on every hand, suggestions--many of them impossible--but no
authoritative guide to say what was to be done. Mrs. Methven, turning
her miserable looks from one to another, saw standing by her side a man
of commanding appearance, who seemed to take no share in either advice
or action, but stood calmly looking on. He was so different from the
rest, that she appealed to him instinctively.

"Oh, sir!" she cried, "you must know what is best to be done--tell
them."

He started a little when she spoke; his face, when he turned it towards
her, was full of strange expression. There was sadness in it, and
mortification, and wounded pride. She said after that he was like a man
disappointed, defeated, full of dejection and indignation. He gave her a
look of keen wonder, and then said with a sort of smile--

"Ah, that is true!" Then in a moment his voice was heard over the crowd.
"The thing to be done," he said, in a voice which was not loud, but
which immediately silenced all the discussions and agitations round, "is
to clear away the ruins. The fire will not burn downward--it has no food
that way--it will exhaust itself. The young lady fell with the wall. If
she is to be found, she will be found there."

The men around all crowded about the spot from which the voice came.

"Wha's that that's speaking?"

"I see nobody."

"What were you saying, sir?"

"Whoever it is, it is the right thing," cried young Patrick from the
yacht. "Harry, keep you the hose going on the house. I'll take the other
work; and thank you for the advice, whoever you are."

Mrs. Forrester too had heard this voice, and the command and calm in it
gave to her troubled soul a new hope. She pushed her way through the
crowd to the spot from whence it came.

"Oh," she cried, "did you see my Oona fall? Did you see my Oona? No, no,
it would not be her that fell. You are just deceived. Where is my Oona?
Oh, sir, tell them where she is that they may find her, and we'll pray
for you on our bended knees, night and morning, every day!"

She threw herself on her knees, as she spoke, on the grass, putting up
her quivering, feverish hands. The other mother, with a horror which she
felt even in the midst of her misery, saw the man to whom this
heartrending prayer was addressed, without casting even a glance at the
suppliant at his feet, or with any appearance of interest in the
proceedings he had advised, turn quietly on his heel and walk away. He
walked slowly across the open space and disappeared upon the edge of the
water with one glance upward to the blazing tower, taking no more notice
of the anxious crowd collected there than if they had not existed. Nor
did any one notice the strange spectator going away at the height of the
catastrophe, when everybody far and near was roused to help. The men
running hurriedly to work did not seem to observe him. The two old
servants of the house, Symington and Macalister, stood crowding
together out of the reach of the stream of water which was being
directed upon the house. But Mrs. Methven took no note of them: only it
gave her a strange surprise in the midst of her anguish to see that
while her Walter's fate still hung in the balance, there was one who
could calmly go away.

By this time the sun had set; the evening, so strangely different from
any other that ever had fallen on the loch, was beginning to darken on
the hills, bringing out with wilder brilliancy the flaming of the great
fire, which turned the tower of Kinloch Houran into a lantern, and
blazed upwards in a great pennon of crimson and orange against the blue
of the skies. For miles down the loch the whole population was out upon
the roads gazing at this wonderful sight; the hillsides were crimsoned
by the reflection, as if the heather had bloomed again; the water glowed
red under the cool calm of the evening sky. Round about Birkenbraes was
a little crowd, the visitors and servants occupying every spot from
which this wonder could be seen, and Mr. Williamson himself, with his
daughter, standing at the gate to glean what information might be
attainable from the passers-by. Katie, full of agitation, unable to bear
the common babble inside, had walked on, scarcely knowing what she did,
in her indoor dress, shivering with cold and excitement. They had all
said to each other that there could be no danger to life in that
uninhabited place.

"Toots, no danger at all!" Mr. Williamson had said, with great
satisfaction in the spectacle. "Old Macalister and his wife are just
like rats in their hole, the fire will never come near them; and the
ruin will be none the worse--it will just be more a ruin than ever."

There was something in Katie's mind which revolted against this easy
treatment of so extraordinary a catastrophe. It seemed to her connected,
she could not tell how, with the scene which had passed in her own room
so short a time before. But for shame she would have walked on to
Auchnasheen to make sure that Walter was in no danger. But what would he
think of her--what would everybody think? Katie went on, however,
abstracted from herself, her eyes upon the blaze in the distance, her
heart full of disturbed thoughts. All at once she heard the firm quick
step of some one advancing to meet her. She looked up eagerly; it might
be Walter himself--it might be----When she saw who it was, she came to a
sudden pause. Her limbs refused to carry her, her very breath seemed to
stop. She looked up at him and trembled. The question that formed on her
lips could not get utterance. He was perfectly calm and courteous, with
a smile that bewildered her and filled her with terror.

"Is there any one in danger?" he said, answering as if she had spoken.
"I think not. There is no one in danger _now_. It is a fine spectacle.
We are at liberty to enjoy it without any drawback--now."

"Oh, sir," said Katie, her very lips quivering, "you speak strangely.
Are you sure that there was no one there?"

"I am sure of nothing," he said with a strange smile.

And then Mr. Williamson, delighted to see a stranger, drew near.

"You need not be so keen with your explanations, Katie. Of course it is
the gentleman we met at Kinloch Houran. Alas! poor Kinloch Houran, we
will never meet there again. You will just stay to dinner now that we
have got you. Come, Katie, where are your manners? you say nothing.
Indeed we will consider it a great honour--just ourselves and a few
people that are staying in the house; and as for dress, what does that
matter? It is a thing that happens every day. Neighbours in the country
will look in without preparation; and for my part, I say always, the
more the merrier," said the open-hearted millionnaire.

The stranger's face lighted up with a gleam of scornful amusement.

"The kindness is great," he said, "but I am on my way to the other end
of the loch."

"You are never walking?" cried Mr. Williamson. "Lord bless us? that was
a thing that used to be done in my young days, but nobody thinks of now.
Your servant will have gone with your baggage? and you would have a
delicacy--I can easily understand--in asking for a carriage in the
excitement of the moment; but ye shall not walk past my house where
there are conveyances of all kinds that it is just a charity to use.
Now, I'll take no denial; there's the boat. In ten minutes they'll get
up steam. I had ordered it, ready to send up to Auchnasheen for news.
But as a friend would never be leaving if the family was in trouble, it
is little use to do that now. I will just make a sign to the boat, and
they'll have ye down in no time; it will be the greatest pleasure--if
you are sure you will not stay to your dinner in the mean time, which is
what I would like best?"

He stood looking down upon them both from his great height; his look had
been sad and grave when he had met Katie, a look full of expression
which she could not fathom. There came now a gleam of amusement over his
countenance. He laughed out.

"That would be admirable," he said, offering no thanks, "I will take
your boat," like a prince according, rather than receiving, a favour.

Mr. Williamson looked at his daughter with a confused air of
astonishment and perplexity, but he sent a messenger off in a boat to
warn the steamer, which lay with its lights glimmering white in the
midst of the red reflections on the loch. The father and daughter stood
there silenced, and with a strange sensation of alarm, beside this
stranger. They exchanged another frightened look.

"You'll be going--a long journey?" Mr. Williamson said, faltering,
scarcely knowing what he said.

"I am going--for a long time, at least," the stranger said.

He seemed to put aside their curiosity as something trifling, unworthy
to be answered, and with a wave of his hand to them, took the path
towards the beach.

They turned and looked after him, drawing close to each other for mutual
comfort. It was twilight, when everything is confusing and uncertain.
They lost sight of him, then saw him again, like a tall pillar on the
edge of the water. There was a confusion of boats coming and going, in
which they could not trace whither he went, or how. Katie and her father
stood watching, taking no account of the progress of time, or of the
cold wind of the night which came in gusts from the hills. They both
drew a long sigh of relief when the steamer was put in motion, and went
off down the loch with its lights like glow-worms on the yards and the
masts. Nor did they say a word to each other as they turned and went
home. When inquiries were made afterwards, nothing but the most confused
account could be had of the embarkation. The boatman had seen the
stranger, but none among them would say that he had conveyed him to the
steamer; and on the steamer the men were equally confused, answering at
random, with strange glances at each other. Had they carried that
passenger down to the foot of the loch? Not even Katie's keen
questioning could elicit a clear reply.

But when the boat had steamed away, carrying into the silence the rustle
of its machinery and the twinkling of its lights, there was another
great explosion from the tower of Kinloch Houran, a loud report which
seemed to roar away into the hollow of the mountains, and came back in a
thousand rolling echoes. A great column of flame shot up into the sky,
the stones fell like a cannonade, and then all was darkness and silence.
The loch fell into sudden gloom; the men who were labouring at the ruins
stopped short, and groped about to find each other through the dust and
smoke which hung over them like a cloud. The bravest stood still, as if
paralysed, and for a moment, through all this strange scene of
desolation and terror, there was but one sound audible, the sound of a
voice which cried "Oona! Oona!" now shrill, now hoarse with exhaustion
and misery, "Oona! Oona!" to earth and heaven.




CHAPTER XVI.


When the curious and the inefficient dropped away, as they did by
degrees as night fell, there were left the three youths from the yacht,
Hamish, Duncan, and two or three men from the village, enough to do a
greater work than that which lay before them; but the darkness and the
consternation, and even their very eagerness and anxiety, confused their
proceedings. Such lamps as they could get from Macalister were fastened
up among the heaps of ruin, and made a series of wild Rembrandt-like
pictures in the gloom, but afforded little guidance to their work. The
masses of masonry which they laboured to clear away seemed to increase
rather than diminish under their picks and spades--new angles of the
wall giving way when they seemed to have come nearly to the foundation.
And now and then from above a mass of stones penetrated through and
through by the fire, and kept in their place only by mere balance, would
topple down without warning, dangerously near their heads, risking the
very lives of the workers; upon whom discouragement gained as the night
wore on, and no result was obtained. After a while, with a mournful
unanimity they stopped work and consulted in whispers what was to be
done. Not a sound had replied to their cries. They had stopped a hundred
times to listen, one more imaginative than the rest, thinking he heard
an answering cry; but no such response had ever come, how was it
possible, from under the choking, suffocating mass, which rolled down
upon them as they worked, almost stopping their breath? They gave up
altogether in the middle of the night in dejection and hopelessness. The
moon had risen and shone all round them, appearing through the great
chasms in the wall, making a glory upon the loch, but lending no help
here, the shadow of the lower part of the house lying black over the
new-made ruin. What was the use? They stood disconsolately consulting
over the possibilities. If Walter and Oona were under those heaps of
ruin, it was impossible that they could be alive, and the men asked each
other, shaking their heads, what chance there was of any of those
fortunate accidents which sometimes save the victims of such a calamity.
The wall had been already worn by time, there were no beams, no archways
which could have sheltered them--everything had come down in one mass of
ruin. After many and troubled discussions they prepared reluctantly to
abandon the hopeless work. "Perhaps, in the morning"--it was all that
any one could say. The young yachtsmen made a last effort, calling out
Walter's name. "If you can speak, for God's sake speak? any sign and
we'll have you out. Erradeen! Erradeen!" they cried. But the silence was
as that of the grave. A fall of powdery fragments now and then from the
heap, sometimes a great stone solemnly bounding downwards from point to
point, the light blown about by the night air lighting up the dark
group, and the solitary figure of Hamish, apart from them, who was
working with a sort of rage, never pausing, pulling away the stones with
his hands. This was all; not a moan, not a cry, not a sound of existence
under those shapeless piles of ruin. The only thing that broke the
silence, and which came now with a heartrending monotony, almost
mechanical, was the cry of "Oona! Oona!" which Oona's mother, scarcely
conscious, sent out into the night.

The men stole softly round the corner of the house which remained
untouched, to get to their boats, stealing away like culprits, though
there was no want of goodwill in them. But they were not prepared for
the scene that met them there. The little platform before the door, and
the landing-place, were bright almost as day with the shining of the
moon, the water one sheet of silver, upon which the boats lay black, the
grassy space below all white and clear. In the midst of this space,
seated on a stone, was Mrs. Methven. She had scarcely stirred all night.
Her companion in sorrow had been taken into the shelter of the house,
but she, unknown and half-forgotten, and strong with all the vigour of
misery, had remained there, avoiding speech of any one. With all her
senses absorbed in listening, not a stroke had escaped her, scarcely a
word--for a long time she had stood and walked about, not asking a
question, observing, seeing, hearing all that was done. But as the awful
hours went on, she had dropped down upon this rough seat, little
elevated above the ground, where her figure now struck the troubled gaze
of the young men, as if it had been that of a sentinel watching to see
that they did not abandon their work. No such thought was in her mind.
She was conscious of every movement they had made. For a moment she had
thought that their call upon her son meant that they had found some
trace of him--but that was a mere instantaneous thrill, which her
understanding was too clear to continue to entertain. She had said to
herself from the beginning that there was no hope; she had said from the
first what the men had said to each other reluctantly after hours of
exertion. What was the good? since nothing could be done. Yet all the
while as she said this, she was nursing within her bosom, concealing it
even from her own consciousness, covering up the smouldering dying fire
in her heart, a hope that would not altogether die. She would not even
go towards the workers when they called out her son's name to know what
it was; but only waited, waited with a desperate, secret, half-heathen
thought, that perhaps if she did not cry and importune, but was silent,
letting God do what He would, He might yet relent and bring her back
her boy. Oh be patient! put on at least the guise of patience! and
perhaps He would be touched by the silence of her misery--He who had not
heard her prayers.

She sat going over a hundred things in her heart. That Walter should
have come back to her, called her to him, opened his heart to her, as a
preparation for being thus snatched from her for ever! She said to
herself that by-and-by she would thank God for this great mercy, and
that she had thus found her son again if only for two days: but in the
mean time her heart bled all the more for the thought, and bereavement
became more impossible, more intolerable, even from that, which
afterwards would make it almost sweet. As she kept that terrible vigil
and heard the sound of the implements with which--oh, what was it?--not
him, his body, the mangled remains of him, were being sought, she seemed
to see him, standing before her, leaning upon her, the strong on the
weak, pouring his troubles into her bosom--as he had not done since he
was a child; and now he was lying crushed beneath those stones. Oh no,
no, Oh no, no--it was not possible. God was not like that, holding the
cup of blessing to a woman's lips and then snatching it away. And then
with an effort she would say to herself what she had said from the
first, what she had never wavered in saying, that there was no hope. How
could there be any hope? crushed beneath tons of falling stones--oh,
crushed out of recognition, out of humanity! her imagination spared her
nothing. When they found him they would tell her it was better, better,
she the mother that bore him, that she should not see him again. And all
the while the moon shining and God looking on. She was callous to the
cry that came continually, mechanically, now stronger, now fainter, from
the rooms above. "Oona, Oona!" Sometimes it made her impatient. Why
should the woman cry, as if her voice could reach her child under those
masses of ruin? And _she_ could not cry who had lost her all! her only
one! why should the other have that relief and she none--nor any hope?
But all the sounds about her caught her ear with a feverish
distinctness. When she heard the steps approaching after the pause of
which she had divined the meaning, they seemed to go over her heart,
treading it down into the dust. She raised her head and looked at them
as they came up, most of the band stealing behind to escape her eye. "I
heard you," she said, "call--my son."

"It was only to try; it was to make an effort; it was a last chance."

"A last----" though she was so composed there was a catch in her breath
as she repeated this word; but she added, with the quiet of despair,
"You are going away?"

The young man who was the spokesman stood before her like a culprit with
his cap in his hand.

"My brothers and I," he said, "would gladly stay if it was any use; but
there is no light to work by, and I fear--I fear--that by this time----"

"There is no more hope?" she said. "I have no hope. I never had any
hope."

The young man turned away with a despairing gesture, and then returned
to her humbly, as if she had been a queen.

"We are all grieved--more grieved than words can say: and gladly would
we stay if we could be of any use. But what can we do? for we are all
convinced--"

"No me," cried Hamish, coming forward in the moonlight. "No me!" his
bleeding hands left marks on his forehead as he wiped the heavy moisture
from it; his eyes shone wildly beneath his shaggy brows. "I was against
it," he cried, "from the first! I said what would they be doing here?
But convinced, that I never will be, no till I find--Mem, if ye tell
them they'll bide. Tell them to bide. As sure as God is in heaven that
was all her thought--we will find her yet."

The other men had slunk away, and were softly getting into their boats.
The three young yachtsmen alone waited, a group of dark figures about
her. She looked up at them standing together in the moonlight, her face
hollowed out as if by the work of years.

"He is my only one," she said, "my only one. And you--you--you are all
the sons of one mother."

Her voice had a shrill anguish in it, insupportable to hear: and when
she paused there came still more shrilly into the air, with a renewed
passion, "Oona! Oona!" the cry that had not ceased for hours. The young
man who was called Patrick flung his clenched hand into the air; he gave
a cry of pity and pain unendurable.

"Go and lie down for an hour or two," he said to the others, "and come
back with the dawn. Don't say a word. I'll stay; it's more than a man
can bear."

When the others were gone, this young fellow implored the poor lady to
go in, to lie down a little, to try and take some rest. What good could
she do? he faltered; and she might want all her strength for
to-morrow--using all those familiar pleas with which the miserable are
mocked. Something like a smile came over her wan face.

"You are very kind," she said, "oh very kind!" but no more. But when he
returned and pressed the same arguments upon her she turned away almost
with impatience. "I will watch with my son to-night," she said, putting
him away with her hand. And thus the night passed.

Mrs. Forrester had been taken only half-conscious into Walter's room
early in the evening. Her cry had become almost mechanical, not to be
stopped; but she, it was hoped, was but half aware of what was passing,
the unwonted and incredible anguish having exhausted her simple being,
unfamiliar with suffering. Mr. Cameron, the minister from the village,
had come over on the first news, and Mysie from the isle to take care
of her mistress. Together they kept watch over the poor mother, who lay
sometimes with her eyes half closed in a sort of stupor, sometimes
springing up wildly, to go to Oona who was ill, and wanting her, she
cried, distraught. "Oona! Oona!" she continued to cry through all. Mysie
had removed her bonnet, and her light faded hair was all dishevelled,
without the decent covering of the habitual cap, her pretty colour gone.
Sorrow seems to lie harder on such a gentle soul. It is cruel. There is
nothing in it that is akin to the mild level of a being so easy and
common. It was torture that prostrated the soul--not the passion of love
and anguish which gave to the other mother the power of absolute
self-control, and strength which could endure all things. Mr. Cameron
himself, struck to the heart, for Oona was as dear to him as a child of
his own, restrained his longing to be out among the workers in order to
soothe and subdue her; and though she scarcely understood what he was
saying, his presence did soothe her. It was natural that the minister
should be there, holding her up in this fiery passage, though she could
not tell why.

And thus the night went on. The moonlight faded outside; the candles
paled and took a sickly hue within as the blue dawn came stealing over
the world. At that chillest, most awful moment of all the circle of
time, Mrs. Forrester had sunk into half-unconsciousness. She was not
asleep, but exhaustion had almost done the part of sleep, and she lay
on the sofa in a stupor, not moving, and for the first time intermitting
her terrible cry. The minister stole down-stairs in that moment of
repose. He was himself an old man and shaken beyond measure by the
incidents of the night. His heart was bleeding for the child of his
spirit, the young creature to whom he had been tutor, counsellor, almost
father from her childhood. He went out with his heart full, feeling the
vigil insupportable in the miserable room above, yet almost less
supportable when he came out to the company of the grey hills growing
visible, a stern circle of spectators round about, and realised with a
still deeper pang the terrible unmitigated fact of the catastrophe. It
was with horror that he saw the other mother sitting patient upon the
stone outside. He did not know her, and had forgotten that such a person
existed as Lord Erradeen's mother. Had she been there all night? "God
help us," he said to himself; "how selfish we are, even to the sharers
of our calamity." She looked up at him as he passed, but said nothing.
And what could he say to her? For the first time he behaved himself like
a coward, and fled from duty and kindness; for what could he say to
comfort her? and why insult her misery with vain attempts? Young Patrick
had pressed shelter and rest upon her, being young and knowing no
better. But the minister could not tell Walter's mother to lie down and
rest, to think of her own life. What was her life to her? He passed her
by with the acute and aching sympathy which bears a share of the
suffering it cannot relieve. And his own suffering was sore. Oona, Oona,
he cried to himself silently in his heart as her mother had done
aloud--his child, his nursling, the flower of his flock. Mysie had told
him in the intervals, when her mistress was quiet, in whispers and with
tears, of all that had happened lately, and of Oona's face that was like
the Sabbath of the Sacrament, so grave yet so smiling as she left the
isle. This went to the old minister's heart. He passed the ruin where
Hamish was still plucking uselessly, half-stupefied, at the stones, and
Patrick, with his back against the unbroken wall, had fallen asleep in
utter weariness. Mr. Cameron did not linger there, but sought a place
out of sight of man, where he could weep: for he was old, and his heart
was too full to do without some natural relief.

He went through the ruined doorway to a place where all was still green
and intact, as it had been before the explosion; the walls standing, but
trees grown in the deep soil which covered the old stone floor. He
leaned his white head against the roughness of the wall, and shed the
tears that made his old eyes heavy, and relieved his old heart with
prayer. He had prayed much all the night through, but with distracted
thoughts, and eyes bent upon the broken-hearted creature by whose side
he watched. But now he was alone with the great and closest Friend, He
to whom all things can be said, and who understands all. "Give us
strength to resign her to Thee," he said, pressing his old cheek
against the damp and cold freshness of the stones, which were wet with
other dews than those of nature, with the few concentrated tears of age,
that mortal dew of suffering. The prayer and the tears relieved his
soul. He lifted his head from the wall, and turned to go back again--if,
perhaps, now fresh from his Master's presence he might find a word to
say to the other woman who all night long, like Rizpah, had sat silent
and watched her son.

But as he turned to go away it seemed to the minister that he heard a
faint sound. He supposed nothing but that one of the men who had been
working had gone to sleep in a corner, and was waking and stirring to
the daylight. He looked round, but saw no one. Perhaps, even, there came
across the old man's mind some recollection of the tales of mystery
connected with this house; but in the presence of death and sorrow, he
put these lesser wonders aside. Nevertheless, there was a sound, faint,
but yet of something human. The old stone floor was deep under layers of
soil upon which every kind of herbage and even trees grew; but in the
corner of the wall against which he had been leaning, the gathered soil
had been hollowed away by the droppings from above, and a few inches of
the original floor was exposed. The old man's heart began to beat with a
bewildering possibility: but he dared not allow himself to think of it:
he said to himself, but it must be a bird, a beast, something imprisoned
in some crevice. He listened. God! was that a moan? He turned and
rushed, with the step of a boy, to where Patrick sat dozing, and Hamish,
stupefied, worked on mechanically. He clutched the one out of his sleep,
the other from his trance of exhaustion--"Come here! come here! and
listen. What is this?" the old minister said.




CHAPTER XVII.


The two fugitives, holding each other's hands, had fled from the fire
without a word to each other. All that needed to be spoken seemed to
them both to be over. They hurried on instinctively, but without any
hope, expecting every moment when destruction should overtake them.
Walter was the last to give up consciousness: but the sickening sense of
a great fall, the whirl and resistance of the air rushing madly against
him through the void, the sensation mounting up to his brain, the last
stronghold of consciousness, and thrill of feeling, as if life were to
end there, in a painful rush of blood, were all that were known to him.
What happened really was that, holding Oona insensible in his arms, he
was carried downwards with the slide and impetus of the part of the ruin
on which he was standing, detached by his own weight, rather than thrown
violently down by the action of the explosion. The force of the fall,
however, was so great, and the mass falling with them so heavy, that
some of the stones, already very unsteady, of the pavement below gave
way, and carried them underground to one of the subterranean cellars,
half filled up with soil, which ran under the whole area of the old
castle. How long they lay there unable to move, and for some part of the
time at least entirely without consciousness, Walter could never tell.
When he recovered his senses he was in absolute darkness and in
considerable pain. Oona had fallen across him and the shock had thus
been broken. It was a moan from her which woke him to life again. But
she made no reply to his first distracted question, and only gave
evidence of life by a faint little cry from time to time--too faint to
be called a cry--a breath of suffering, no more. The suffocating
terrible sensation of the darkness, a roar of something over them like
thunder, the oppression of breathing, which was caused by the want of
atmosphere, all combined to bewilder his faculties and take away both
strength and will to do anything more than lie there quietly and gasp
out the last breath. Walter was roused by feeling in Oona an unconscious
struggle for breath. She raised first one hand, then another, as if to
take away something which was stifling her, and he began to perceive in
the vagueness of his awakening consciousness that her life depended upon
his exertions. Then, his eyes becoming more accustomed to the darkness,
he caught a faint ray of light, so attenuated as to be no more than a
thread in the solid gloom. To drag himself towards this, and with
himself the still more precious burden, thus in utter helplessness
confided to him, was a more terrible work than Walter in all his life
had ever attempted before. There was not room to stand upright, and his
limbs were so shaken and aching that he could scarcely raise himself
upon them; and one of his arms was useless, and, when he tried to raise
it, gave him the most exquisite pain. It seemed hours before he could
succeed in dragging her to the little opening, a mere crevice between
the stones, through which the thread of light had come. When he had
cleared the vegetation from it, a piercing cold breath came in and
revived him. He raised Oona in his arms to the air, but the weight of
her unconsciousness was terrible to him in his weakened condition, and
though she began to breathe more easily, she was not sufficiently
recovered to give him any help.

Thus she lay, and he crouched beside her, trying to think, for he could
not tell how long. He heard sounds above him indeed, but the roar of the
falling stones drowned the human noises, and his brain was too much
clouded to think of the search which must be going on overhead for his
companion and himself. The worst of all was this dazed condition of his
brain, so that it was a long time before he could put one thing to
another and get any command of his thoughts. In all likelihood
consciousness did not fully return until the time when the men above in
despair relinquished their work, for some feeble sense of cries and
human voices penetrated the darkness, but so muffled and far off that in
the dimness of his faculties he did not in any way connect them with
himself, nor think of attempting any reply. Perhaps it was, though he
was not aware that he heard it, the echo of his own name that finally
brought him to the full possession of himself--and then all his dull
faculties centred, not in the idea of any help at hand, but in that of
fighting a way somehow to a possible outlet. How was he to do it? The
pain of his arm was so great that at times he had nearly fainted with
mere bodily suffering, and his mind fluctuated from moment to moment--or
was it not rather from hour to hour?--with perplexity and vain
endeavour. He was conscious, however, though he had not given any
meaning to the sounds he heard, of the strange silence which followed
upon the stopping of the work. Something now and then like the movements
of a bird (was it Hamish working wildly above, half-mad, half-stupefied,
unable to be still?) kept a little courage in him, but the silence and
darkness were terrible, binding his very soul.

It was then that he had the consolation of knowing that his companion
had come to herself. Suddenly a hand groping found his, and caught it;
it was his wounded arm, and the pain went like a knife to his heart, a
pang which was terrible, but sweet.

"Where are we?" Oona said, trying to raise herself--oh, anguish!--by
that broken arm.

He could not answer her for the moment, he was so overcome by the
pain--and he was holding her up with the other arm.

"Do not hold my hand," he said at last; "take hold of my coat. Thank God
that you can speak!"

"Your arm is hurt, Walter?"

"Broken, I think; but never mind, that is nothing. Nothing matters so
long as you have your senses. Oona, if we die together, it will be all
right?"

"Yes," she said, raising her face in the darkness to be nearer his. He
kissed her solemnly, and for the moment felt no more pain.

"As well this way as another. Nothing can reach us here--only silence
and sleep."

She began to raise herself slowly, until her head struck against the low
roof. She gave a faint cry--then finding herself on her knees, put her
arm round him, and they leant against each other. "God is as near in the
dark as in the day," she said. "Lord, deliver us--Lord, deliver us!"
Then, after a pause, "What happened? You saved my life."

"Is it saved?" he asked. "I don't know what has happened, except that we
are together."

Oona gave a sudden shudder and clung to him. "I remember now, the flames
and the fire: and it was I that broke the lamp. What did it mean, the
lamp? I thought it was something devilish--something to harm you." She
shivered more and more, clinging to him. "Do you think it is He--that
has shut us up in this dungeon, to die?"

Walter made no reply; it was no wonder to him that she should speak
wildly. He too was tempted to believe that accident had no part in what
had befallen them, that they had now encountered the deadly vengeance
of their enemy. He tried to soothe her, holding her close to his
breast. "I think we are in some of the vaults below--perhaps for our
salvation." As her courage failed there was double reason that he should
maintain a good heart. "There must be some outlet. Will you stay here
and wait till I try if I can find a way?"

"Oh no, no," cried Oona, clinging to him, "let us stay together. I will
creep after you. I will not hinder you." She broke off with a cry,
echoing, but far more keenly, the little moan that came from him
unawares as he struck his arm against the wall. She felt it far more
sharply than he did, and in the darkness he felt her soft hands binding
round his neck something warm and soft like their own touch in which she
had wound the wounded arm to support it. It was the long white "cloud"
which had been about her throat, and it warmed him body and soul; but he
said nothing by way of gratitude. They were beyond all expressions of
feeling, partly because they had reached the limit at which reality is
too overpowering for sentiment, and partly because there was no longer
any separation of mine and thine between them, and they were but one
soul.

But to tell the miseries of their search after a way of escape would
demand more space than their historian can afford. They groped along the
wall, thinking now that they saw a glimmer in one direction, now in
another, and constantly brought up with a new shock against the opaque
resistance round them, a new corner, or perhaps only that from which
they started; under their feet unequal heaps of damp soil upon which
they stumbled, and broken stones over which Oona, with childlike sobs of
which she was unconscious, caught her dress, falling more than once as
they laboured along. In this way they moved round and round their
prison, a long pilgrimage. At length, when they were almost in despair,
saying nothing to each other, only keeping close that the touch of each
to each might be a moral support, they found themselves in what seemed a
narrow passage, walls on each side, and something like an arrowslit over
their heads, the light from which showed them where they were, and was
as an angel of consolation to the two wounded and suffering creatures,
stumbling along with new hope. But when they had reached the end of this
narrow passage, Walter, going first, fell for a distance of two or three
feet into the lower level of another underground chamber like that which
he had left, jarring his already strained and racked frame, and only by
an immense effort hindered Oona from falling after him. The force of the
shock, and instant recovery by which he kept her back and helped her to
descend with precaution, brought heavy drops of exhaustion and pain to
his forehead. And when they discovered that they were nothing the better
for their struggles, and that the place which they had reached at such a
cost, though lighter, was without any outlet whatever except that by
which they had come, their discouragement was so great that Walter had
hard ado not to join in the tears which Oona, altogether prostrated by
the disappointment, shed on his shoulder.

"We must not give in," he tried to say. "Here there is a little light at
least. Oona, my darling, do not break down, or I shall break down too."

"No, no," she said submissively through her sobs, leaning all her weight
upon him. He led her as well as he was able to a heap of earth in the
corner, over which in the roof was a little opening to the light, barred
with an iron stanchion, and quite out of reach. Here he placed her
tenderly, sitting down by her, glad of the rest, though it was so
uninviting. The light came in pale and showed the strait inclosure of
their little prison. They were neither of them able to resume their
search, but sat close together leaning against each other, throbbing
with pain, and sick with weariness and disappointment. It gave Walter a
kind of forlorn pride in his misery to feel that while Oona had failed
altogether, he was able to sustain and uphold her. They did not speak in
their weakness, but after a while dozed and slept, in that supreme
necessity of flesh and blood which overcomes even despair, and makes no
account of danger. They slept as men will sleep at death's door, in the
midst of enemies: and in the depths of their suffering and misery found
refreshment. But in that light sleep little moans unawares came with
their breathing, for both were bruised and shaken, and Walter's broken
arm was on fire with fever and pain. It was those breathings of
unconscious suffering that caught the ear of the minister as he made
his prayer. His step had not disturbed them, but when he came back
accompanied by the others, the light was suddenly darkened and the
stillness broken by some one who flung himself upon his knees with a
heavy shock of sound and a voice pealing in through the opening--"Miss
Oona, if ye are there, speak! or, oh for the love of the Almighty,
whoever is there, speak and tell me where's my leddy?" It was Hamish,
half mad with hope and suspense and distracted affection, who thus
plunged between them and the light.

They both woke with the sound, but faintly divining what it was, alarmed
at first rather than comforted by the darkness into which they were
plunged. There was a pause before either felt capable of reply, that
additional deprivation being of more immediate terror to them, than
there was consolation in the half-heard voice. In this pause, Hamish,
maddened by the disappointment of his hopes, scrambled to his feet
reckless and miserable, and shook his clenched fist in the face of the
minister who was behind him.

"How dare ye," he cried, "play upon a man, that is half wild, with your
imaginations! there's naebody there!" and with something between a growl
and an oath, he flung away, with a heavy step that sounded like thunder
to the prisoners. But next moment the rage of poor Hamish all melted
away into the exceeding and intense sweetness of that relief which is
higher ecstasy than any actual enjoyment given to men, the very
sweetness of heaven itself--for as he turned away the sound of a voice,
low and weak, but yet a voice, came out of the bowels of the earth; a
murmur of two voices that seemed to consult with each other, and then a
cry of "Oona is safe. Oona is here. Come and help us, for the love of
God."

"The Lord bless you!" cried the old minister, falling on his knees.
"Oona, speak to me, if you are there. Oona, speak to me! I want to hear
your own voice."

There was again a pause of terrible suspense. Hamish threw himself down,
too, behind the minister, tears running over his rough cheeks, while the
young man, who was overawed by the sight, and affected too, in a lesser
degree, stood with his face half hidden against the wall.

"I am here," Oona said feebly, "all safe--not hurt even. We are both
safe; but oh, make haste, make haste, and take us out of this place."

"God bless you, my bairn. God bless you, my dearest bairn!" cried Mr.
Cameron: but his words were drowned in a roar of laughter and weeping
from the faithful soul behind him--"Ay, that will we, Miss Oona--that
will we, Miss Oona!" Hamish shouted and laughed and sobbed till the
walls rang, then clamorous with his heavy feet rushed out of sight
without another word, they knew not where.

"I'll follow him," said young Patrick; "he will know some way."

The minister was left alone at the opening through which hope had come.
He was crying like a child, and ready to laugh too like Hamish.

"My bonny dear," he said; "my bonny dear----" and could not command his
voice.

"Mr. Cameron--my mother. She must be breaking her heart."

"And mine," Walter said with a groan. He thought even then of the
bitterness of her woe, and of all the miserable recollections that must
have risen in her mind: please God not to come again.

"I am an old fool," said Mr. Cameron, outside: "I cannot stand out
against the joy; but I am going. I'm going, my dear. Say again you are
not hurt, Oona. Say it's you, my darling, my best bairn!"

"And me that had not the courage to say a word to yon poor woman," he
said to himself as he hurried away. The light was still grey in the
skies, no sign of the sun as yet, but not only the hills distinct
around, but the dark woods, and the islands on the water, and even the
sleeping roofs so still among their trees on the shores of the loch, had
come into sight. The remaining portion of the house which had stood so
many assaults, and the shapeless mass of the destroyed tower, stood up
darkly against the growing light: and almost like a part of it, like a
statue that had come down from its pedestal was the figure of Mrs.
Methven, which he saw standing between him and the shore, her face
turned towards him. She had heard the hurrying steps and the shout of
Hamish, and knew that something had happened. She had risen against her
will, against the resolution she had formed, unable to control herself,
and stood with one hand under her cloak, holding her heart, to repress,
if possible, the terrible throbbing in it. The face she turned towards
the minister overawed him in the simplicity of his joy. It was grey,
like the morning, or rather ashen white, the colour of death. Even now
she would not, perhaps could not, ask anything; but only stood and
questioned him with her eyes, grown to twice their usual size, in the
great hollows which this night had opened out.

The minister knew that he should speak carefully, and make easy to her
the revolution from despair to joy; but he could not. They were both
beyond all secondary impulses. He put the fact into the plainest words.

"Thank God! your son is safe," he cried.

"What did you say?"

"Oh, my poor lady, God be with you. I dared not speak to you before.
Your son is safe. Do you know what I mean? He is as safe as you or me."

She kept looking at him, unable to take it into her mind; that is to
say, her mind had flashed upon it, seized it at the first word,
yet--with a dumb horror holding hope away from her, lest deeper despair
might follow--would not allow her to believe.

"What--did you say? You are trying to make me think----" And then she
broke off, and cried out "Walter!" as if she saw him--as a mother might
cry who saw her son suddenly, unlooked for, come into the house when
all believed him dead--and fell on her knees,--then from that attitude
sank down upon herself, and dropped prostrate on the ground.

Mr. Cameron was alarmed beyond measure. He knew nothing of faints, and
he thought the shock had killed her. But what could he do? It was
against his nature to leave a stranger helpless. He took off his coat
and covered her, and then hurried to the door and called up Macalister's
wife, who was dozing in a chair.

"I think I have killed her," he said, "with my news."

"Then ye have found him?" the three old people said together, the woman
clasping her hands with a wild "Oh hon--oh hon!" while Symington came
forward, trembling, and pale as death.

"I had hoped," he said, with quivering lips, "like the apostles with One
that was greater, that it was he that was to have delivered----Oh, but
we are vain creatures! and now it's a' to begin again."

"Is that all ye think of your poor young master? He is living, and will
do well. Go and take up the poor lady. She is dead, or fainted, but it
is with joy."

And then he went up-stairs. Many an intimation of sorrow and trouble the
minister had carried. But good news had not been a weight upon him
hitherto. He went to the other poor mother with trouble in his heart. If
the one who had been so brave was killed by it, how encounter her whose
soft nature had fallen prostrate at once? He met Mysie at the door, who
told him her mistress had slept, but showed signs of waking.

"Oh, sir, if ye could give her something that would make her sleep
again! I could find it in my heart to give her, what would save my poor
lady from ever waking more," cried the faithful servant; "for oh, what
will she do--oh, what will we all do without Miss Oona?"

"Mysie," cried the minister, "how am I to break it to her? I have just
killed the poor lady down-stairs with joy; and what am I to say to your
mistress? Miss Oona is safe and well--she's safe and well."

"Oh, Mr. Cameron," cried Mysie, with a sob, "I ken what you are meaning.
She's well, the Lord bless her, because she has won to heaven."

Mrs. Forrester had woke during this brief talk, and raised herself upon
the sofa. She broke in upon them in a tone so like her ordinary voice,
so cheerful and calm, that they both turned round upon her with a kind
of consternation.

"What is that you are saying--safe and well--oh, safe and well. Thank
God for it; but I never had a moment's doubt. And where has she been all
this weary night; and why did she leave me in this trouble? What are ye
crying for, Mysie, like a daft woman? You may be sure, my darling has
been doing good, and not harm."

"That is true, my dear lady--that is true, my dear friend," cried the
minister. "God bless her! She has done us all good, all the days of her
sweet life."

"And you are crying too," said Oona's mother, almost with indignation.
"What were you feared for? Do you think I could not trust God, that has
always been merciful to me and mine? or was it Oona ye could not trust?"
she said with smiling scorn. "And is she coming soon? For it seems to me
we have been here a weary time."

"As soon--as she can get out of the--place where she is. The openings
are blocked up by the ruin."

"I had no doubt," said Mrs. Forrester, "it was something of that kind."

Then she rose up from the sofa, very weak and tottering, but smiling
still, her pale and faded face looking ten years older, her hair all
ruffled, falling out of its usual neat arrangement. She put up her hands
to her head with a little cry.

"Bless me," she said, "she will think I have gone out of my senses, and
you too, Mysie, to take my bonnet off and expose me, with no cap. I must
put all this right again before my Oona comes."

Mr. Cameron left her engaged in these operations, with the deepest
astonishment. Was it a faith above the reach of souls less simple? or
was it the easy rebound of a shallow nature? He watched her for a moment
as she put up her thin braids of light hair, and tied her ribbons,
talking all the time of Oona.

"She never was a night out of her bed in all her life before; and my
only fear is she may have gotten a chill, and no means here of making
her comfortable. Mysie, you will go down-stairs, and try at least to get
the kettle to boil, and a cup of tea for her. Did the minister say when
she would be here?"

"No, mem," said Mysie's faltering voice; "naething but that she was safe
and well; and the Lord forgive me--I thought--I thought----"

"Never mind what you thought," said Mrs. Forrester briskly, "but run
down-stairs and see if you can make my darling a good cup of tea."

By the time she had tied her bonnet strings and made herself
presentable, the full light of the morning was shining upon the roused
world. The air blew chill in her face as she came down the staircase
(strangely weak and tottering, which was "just extraordinary" she said
to herself), and emerged upon the little platform outside. Several boats
already lay on the beach, and there was the sound of the voices and
footsteps of men breaking the stillness. Mrs. Forrester came out with
those little graces which were part of herself, giving a smile to old
Symington, and nodding kindly to the young men from the yacht who were
just coming ashore. "This is early hours," she said to them with her
smile, and went forward to the little group before the door, surrounding
Mrs. Methven, who still lay where Mr. Cameron had left her, incapable of
movement. "Dear me," said Mrs. Forrester, "here have I been taking up a
comfortable room, and them that have a better right left out of doors.
They have given us a terrible night, my child and yours, but let us hope
there has been a good reason for it, and that they will be none the
worse. They are just coming, the minister tells me. If ye will take the
help of my arm, we might step that way and meet them. They will be glad
to see we are not just killed with anxiety, which is what my Oona will
fear."




CHAPTER XVIII.


The news that Lord Erradeen, and it was supposed several others--some
went so far as to say a party of visitors, others his mother, newly
arrived as all the world was aware, and to whom he was showing the old
castle, with a young lady who was her companion--had perished in the
fire, streamed down the loch nobody knew how, and was known and believed
to the end of the country before the evening was over. It came to the
party at Birkenbraes as they were sitting down to dinner, some time
after everybody had come in from gazing at the extraordinary spectacle
of the fire, got up, Mr. Williamson assured his guests, entirely for
their amusement. The good man, however, had been much sobered out of
that jocose mood by his encounter with the strange visitor whom he had
first seen at Kinloch Houran, but had begun to draw a little advantage
from that too, and was telling the lady next to him with some pride of
Lord Erradeen's relation, a very distinguished person indeed. "I'm
thinking in the diplomatic service, or one of the high offices that keep
a man abroad all his life. (I would rather for my part live in a
cottage at home, but that is neither here nor there.) So as he was
leaving and naturally could not trouble the family about carriages just
at such a moment, I offered him the boat: and you could see them getting
up steam. I find it very useful to have a steam-boat always ready, just
waiting at the service of my friends." The lady had replied as in duty
bound, and as was expected of her, that it was a magnificent way of
serving your friends, which the millionnaire on his side received with a
laugh and a wave of his hand, declaring that it was nothing, just
nothing, a bagatelle in the way of cost, but a convenience, he would not
deny it was a convenience; when that discreet butler who had ushered
Lord Erradeen into Katie's private sitting-room, leaned over his
master's shoulder with a solemn face, and a "Beg your pardon, sir. They
say, sir, that Lord Erradeen has perished in the fire."

"Lord bless us!" said Mr. Williamson, "what is that you say?"

"It is only a rumour, sir, but I hear Kinloch Houran is all in a
commotion, and it is believed everywhere. The young lord was seen with
some ladies going there in a boat this afternoon, and they say that he
has perished in the flames."

Sanderson was fond of fine language, and his countenance was composed to
the occasion.

"Lord bless us!" cried Mr. Williamson again. "Send off a man and horse
without a moment's delay to find out the truth. Quick, man, and put down
the sherry, I'll help myself! Poor lad, poor lad, young Erradeen! He
was about this house like one of our own, and no later than
yesterday--Katie, do you hear?" he cried, half rising and leaning over
the forest of flowers and ferns that covered the table, "Katie! do you
hear this terrible news? but it cannot be true!"

Katie had been told at the same moment, and the shock was so great that
everything swam in her eyes, as she looked up blanched and
terror-stricken in mechanical obedience to her father's cry. "That man
will have killed him," she said to herself: and then there came over her
mind a horror which was flattering too, which filled her with dismay and
pain, yet with a strange sensation of importance. Was it she who was to
blame for this catastrophe, was she the cause----

"It seems to be certain," said some one at the table, "that Erradeen was
there. He was seen on the battlements with a lady, just before the
explosion."

"His mother!" said Katie, scarcely knowing why it was that she put forth
this explanation.

"A young lady. There is some extraordinary story among the people that
she--had something to do with the fire."

"That will be nonsense," said Mr. Williamson. "What would a lady have to
do with the fire? Old stone walls like yon are not like rotten wood. I
cannot understand for my part----"

"And there could be no young lady," said Katie. "Mrs. Methven was
alone."

"Well, well!" said her father. "I am sorry--sorry for Lord Erradeen; he
was just as fine a young fellow----But we will do him no good, poor lad,
by letting our dinner get cold. And perhaps the man will bring us better
news--there is always exaggeration in the first report. I am afraid you
will find that soup not eatable, Lady Mary. Just send it away; there is
some fine trout coming."

He was sincerely sorry; but, after all, to lose the dinner would have
spared nothing to poor young Erradeen.

Katie said little during the long meal. Her end of the table, usually so
gay, was dull. Now and then she would break in with a little spasmodic
excitement, and set her companions talking: then relapse with a strange
mingling of grief and horror, and that melancholy elation which fills
the brain of one who suddenly feels himself involved in great affairs
and lifted to heroic heights. If it was for her--if it was she who was
the cause of this calamity----She had dreamed often of finding herself
with a high heroic part to fulfil in the world, though it seemed little
likely that she would ever realise her dream; but now, Katie said to
herself, if this was so, never more should another take the place which
she had refused to him. If he had died for her, she would live--for him.
She would find out every plan he had ever formed for good and fulfil it.
She would be the providence of the poor tenants whom he had meant to
befriend. She imagined herself in this poetical position always under a
veil of sadness, yet not enough to make her unhappy--known in the county
as the benefactor of everybody, described with whispers aside as "the
lady that was to have married poor young Lord Erradeen." Katie was
profoundly sorry for poor Walter--for the first few minutes her grief
was keen; but very soon this crowd of imaginations rushed in,
transporting her into a new world. If this were so! Already everybody at
table had begun to remark her changed looks, and to whisper that they
had been sure there was "something between" Katie and the poor young
lord. When the ladies went to the drawing-room they surrounded her with
tender cares.

"If you would like to go to your room, my dear, never mind us."

"Oh, never mind us," cried the gentle guests, "we can all
understand----"

But Katie was prudent even at this crisis of fate. She reflected that
the report might not be true, and that it was premature at least to
accept the position. She smiled upon the ladies who surrounded her, and
put her handkerchief to her eyes.

"Of course," she said, "I can't help feeling it--every one will feel it
on the loch--and we had seen so much of him! But perhaps, as papa says,
when the messenger comes back, we may have better news."

The messenger did not come back till late, when the party were about to
separate. He had found the greatest difficulty in getting information,
for all that was known at Auchnasheen was that the young lord and his
mother had gone in the boat from the isle with the ladies, to see the
old castle. With the ladies! Katie could not restrain a little cry. She
knew what was coming. And he had been seen, the man went on, with Miss
Oona on the walls--and that was all that was known. This stroke went to
Katie's heart. "Oona!" she cried, with something of sharpness and
bitterness in the cry; though in the wail that rose from all around who
knew the isle, this tone that broke the harmony of grief was lost. But
her little fabric of imaginary heroism fell into the dust: and for the
moment the shock of a genuine, if alloyed, sentiment thrown back upon
herself, and the secret mortification with which she became conscious of
the absurdity of her own self-complacence, kept Katie from feeling the
natural pity called forth by such a catastrophe, and the deeper pang
which by-and-by awakened her heart to the thought of Oona--Oona no
rival, but the friend of her youth, Oona the only companion of her
mother, the young and hopeful creature whom everybody loved. To think
that she should have indulged a little miserable rivalry--on account of
a man for whom she did not care the hundredth part so much as she cared
for Oona, before realising this real grief and calamity! Katie's honest
little soul was bowed down with shame. She, too, watched that night with
many a prayer and tear, gazing from her many-windowed chamber towards
the feathery crest of the isle which lay between her and Kinloch
Houran. Oh, the desolation that would be there and Oona gone! Oh, the
blank upon the loch, and in all the meetings of the cheerful neighbours!
Another man on horseback was sent off by break of day for news, and not
only from Birkenbraes, but from every house for miles round the
messengers hurried. There had been no such excitement in the district
for generations.

The news reached the Lodge--Sir Thomas Herbert's shooting-box--early in
the morning when the family met at breakfast. The previous night had
been occupied with an excitement of their own. Major Antrobus, Sir
Thomas's friend, brother in sport and arms, had been from the moment of
his arrival a disappointment to Sir Thomas. The first evening Julia had
caught him in her toils. She had sung and laughed and talked his heart,
so much as remained to him, away. He was the man of all others who, his
friends were convinced, was not a marrying man. He had a good estate, a
house full of every bachelor comfort, and was useful to those in whom he
was interested as only a bachelor can be. Nor was it only to men that he
was invaluable as a friend. He had a box at Ascot; he had ways of making
the Derby delightful to a party of ladies; he was of infinite use at
Goodwood; he knew everybody whom it was well to know. Lady Herbert was
almost as inconsolable as her husband at the idea of losing him. And
that such a man should be brought by Sir Thomas himself into harm's
way, and delivered over to the enemy by the very hands of his friends,
was more than flesh and blood could bear. The Herberts saw their mistake
before he had been at the Lodge two days. But what could they do? They
could not send him away--nor could they send Julia away. Had they done
so, that young lady had already made herself friends enough to have
secured two or three invitations in a foolishly hospitable country,
where everybody's first idea was to ask you to stay with them! Sir
Thomas acted with the noble generosity characteristic of middle-aged men
of the world in such circumstances. He told his friend, as they smoked
their cigars in the evening, a great many stories about Julia, and all
she had been "up to" in her chequered career. He described how Lady
Herbert had brought her down here, because of some supposed possibility
about Lord Erradeen. "But young fellows like that are not to be so
easily taken in," Sir Thomas said, and vaunted his own insight in
perceiving from the first that there was nothing in it. The major
listened, and sucked his cigar, and said nothing; but next day on the
way home, when the fire at Kinloch Houran was reddening the skies, took
his host aside, and said--

"I say, all that may be true, you know. I don't know anything about
that. Girls, you know, poor things! they've devilish hard lines, when
they've got no tin. If she's tried it on, you know, once or twice
before, that's nothing to me. That's all their mother's fault, don't
you know. She's the jolliest girl I ever met, and no end of fun. With
her in the house, you know, a fellow would never be dull, and I can tell
you it's precious dull at Antrobus on off days, when all you fellows are
away. I say! I've asked her--to be mine, you know, and all that; and
she's--going to have me, Tom!"

"Going to have you! Oh, I'll be bound she is! and everything you've got
belonging to you!" in the keenness of his annoyance, cried Sir Thomas.

The major, who was somewhat red in the face, and whose figure was not
elegant (but what trifles were these, Julia truly said, in comparison
with a true heart!), hemmed a little, and coughed, and set his chin into
his shirt collar. He stood like a man to his choice, and would have no
more said.

"Of course she is--if she's going to have me, you know. Fixtures go with
the property," said Major Antrobus, with a hasty laugh. "And, I say,
by-gones are by-gones, you know--but no more of them in the future if
we're going to be friends."

The men had a quarrel, however, before Sir Thomas gave in--which was
stopped fortunately before it went too far by his wife, who met them all
smiles with both hands extended.

"What are you talking loud about, you two?" she said. "Major, I'm
delighted. Of course I've seen it all along. She'll make you an
excellent wife, and I wish you all the happiness in the world."

"Thank you: he don't think so," the major said with a growl.

But after this Sir Thomas perceived that to quarrel with a man for
marrying your cousin whom he has met in your house is one of the
foolishest of proceedings. He relieved his feelings afterwards by
falling upon the partner of his life.

"What humbugs you women are! What lies you tell! You said she would make
him an excellent wife."

"And so she will," said Lady Herbert, "a capital wife! He will be twice
as happy, but alas! no good at all henceforward," she ended with a sigh.

The excitement of this incident was not over, when to the
breakfast-table next morning, where Julia appeared triumphant, having
overcome all opposition, the news arrived, not softened by any doubt as
if the result was still uncertain, but with that pleasure in enhancing
the importance of dolorous intelligence which is common to all who have
the first telling of a catastrophe. There was a momentary hush of horror
when the tale was told, and then Julia, her expression changed in a
moment, her eyes swimming in tears, rose up in great excitement from her
lover's side.

"Oh, Walter!" she cried, greatly moved. "Oh that I should be so happy,
and he----" And then she paused, and her tears burst forth. "And his
mother--his mother!"

She sat down again and wept, while the rest of the party looked on, her
major somewhat gloomy, her cousin (after a momentary tribute of silence
to death) with a dawning of triumph in his eye.

"You always thought a great deal of young Erradeen, Ju--at least since
he has been Lord Erradeen."

"I always was fond of him," she cried. "Poor Walter! poor Walter! Oh,
you can weigh my words if you like at such a time, but I won't weigh
them. If Henry likes to be offended I can't help it. He has no reason.
Oh, Walter, Walter! I was always fond of him. I have known him since I
was _that_ high--and his mother, I have always hated her. I have known
her since I was _that_ high. If you think such things go for nothing it
is because you have no hearts. Harry, if you love me as you say, get
your dog-cart ready this moment and take me to that poor woman--that
poor, poor woman! His mother--and she has only him in all the world.
Harry, take me or not but I will go----"

"You said you hated her, Julia," cried Lady Herbert.

"And so I did: and what does that matter? Shall I keep away from her for
that--when I am the only one that has known him all his life--that knew
him from a child? Harry----"

"I have ordered the dog-cart, my dear; and you are a good woman, Julia.
I thought so, but with all your dear friends and people hang me if I
knew."

Julia gave him her hand: she was crying without any disguise.

"Perhaps I haven't been very good," she said, "but I never was
hard-hearted, and when I think upon that poor woman among strangers----"

"By Jove, but this is something new," cried Sir Thomas; "the girl that
liked young men best without their mothers, Antrobus, hey?"

"Oh hush, Tom," cried his wife; "and dear Julia, be consistent a
little--that you're sorry for your old--friend (don't laugh, Tom; say
her old flame if you like, but remember that he's dead, poor fellow),
that we can understand. Major Antrobus knows all that story. But this
fuss about the mother whom you never could bear. Oh that is a little too
much! You can't expect us to take in that!"

Julia turned upon her relations with what at bottom was a generous
indignation. "If you don't know," she said, "how it feels to hear of
another person's misfortune, when you yourself are happier than you
deserve--and if you don't understand that I would go on my knees to poor
Mrs. Methven to take one scrap of her burden off her! oh all the more
because I never liked her----But what is the use of talking, for if you
don't understand, nothing I could say would make you understand. And it
does not matter to me now," cried Julia, less noble feelings breaking
in, "now I have got one who is going to stand by me, who knows what I
mean, and will put no bad motive--"

The real agitation and regret in her face gave force to the triumph with
which she turned to her major, and taking his arm swept out of the room.
He, too, had all the sense of dignity which comes from fine feeling
misunderstood, and felt himself elevated in the scale of humanity by his
superior powers of understanding. Lady Herbert, who remained behind, was
saved by the humour of the situation from exploding, as Sir Thomas did.
To think that the delicacy of the major's perceptions should be the
special foundation of his bride's satisfaction was, as she declared with
tears of angry laughter, "too good!"

But the second and better news arrived before Julia could set out on her
charitable mission. Perhaps it was better that it should end so: for
though the first outburst of feeling had been perfectly genuine and
sincere, the impulse might have been alloyed by less perfect wishes
before she had reached Kinloch Houran. And it is doubtful in any case
whether her ministrations, however kind, would have been acceptable to
Walter's mother. As it was, when she led her major back, Julia was too
clever not to find a medium of reconciliation with her cousins, who by
that time had come to perceive how ludicrous any quarrel open to the
world would be. And so peace was established, and Julia Herbert's
difficulties came in the happiest way to an end.




CHAPTER XIX.


The miseries of the night's imprisonment were soon forgotten. Oona,
elastic in youthful health, recovered in a few days, she said in a few
hours, from its effects, and the keen reality of the after events dimmed
in her mind the mystery of that extraordinary moment which appeared now
like a dream, too wonderful to be true, too inexplicable and beyond
experience to come into natural life at all. They spoke of it to each
other with bated breath, but not till some time after their rescue, when
the still higher excitement of their near approach to death--a thing
which reveals the value and charm of life as nothing else does--had
somewhat subsided in their minds. But their recollections were confused,
they could not tell how; and as Walter had never been sure after they
were over, whether the terrible conflicts which he had gone through were
not conflicts between the better and worse parts of his own nature,
without any external influence, so they asked each other now whether the
mysterious chamber, the burning lamp, the strange accessories of a
concealed and mysterious life, were dreams of disordered fancy, or
something real and actual. They could not explain these things to each
other, neither could they understand what it was that made the throwing
down of the light of such vital importance. Was it common fire, acting
after the ordinary laws of nature and finding ready fuel in the dry wood
and antique furniture? or was it something more mystic, more momentous?
They gave little explanation to questioners, not so much because they
were unwilling, as because they were unable; and when they discussed it
between themselves became more and more confused as the days went on. It
became like a phantasmagoria, sometimes suddenly appearing in all the
vivid lines of reality, sometimes fading into a pale apparition which
memory could scarcely retain.

To the world in general the fact of a great fire, a thing unfortunately
not very rare in the records of ancient houses, became after a while a
very simple piece of history; and the wonderful escape of Lord Erradeen
and Miss Forrester, and their subsequent betrothal and marriage, a
pretty piece of natural romance. The tower, now preserving nothing more
than a certain squareness in its mass of ruins, showed traces of two
rooms that might have been, but everything was destroyed except the
stones, and any remains that might have withstood the action of the fire
were buried deep under the fallen walls; nor could any trace be found of
concealed passages or any way of descent into the house from that
unsuspected hiding-place. One thing was certain, however, that the being
who had exercised so strange an influence on a year of his life never
appeared to Walter more. There were moments in which he felt, with a
pang of alarm, that concentration of his thoughts upon himself, that
subtle direction and intensification of his mind, as if it had suddenly
been driven into a dialogue with some one invisible, which had been the
worst of all the sufferings he had to bear; but these, after the first
terror, proved to be within the power of his own efforts to resist and
shake off, and never came to any agonising crisis like that which he had
formerly passed through. His marriage, which took place as soon as
circumstances would permit, ended even these last contentions of the
spirit. And if in the midst of his happiness he was sometimes tortured
by the thought that the change of his life from the evil way to the good
one had all the results of the most refined selfishness, as his
adversary had suggested, and that he was amply proving the ways of
righteousness to be those of pleasantness, and godliness to be great
gain, that thought was too ethereal for common use, and did not stand
the contact of reality. Mr. Cameron, to whom he submitted it in some
moment of confidence, smiled with the patience of old age upon this
overstrained self-torment.

"It is true enough," the minister said, "that the right way is a way of
pleasantness, and that all the paths of wisdom are peace. But life has
not said out its last word, and ye will have to tread them one time or
other with bleeding feet, or all is done--if the Lord has not given you
a lot apart from that of other men. And human nature," the old man said,
not without a little recollection of some sermon, at which he smiled as
he spoke, "is so perverse, that when trouble comes, you that are afraid
of your happiness will be the first to cry out and upbraid the good Lord
that does not make it everlasting. Wait, my young man, wait--till
perhaps you have a boy at your side that will vex your heart as children
only can vex those that love them--wait till death steps into your
house, as step he must----"

"Stop!" cried Walter, with a wild sudden pang of that terror of which
the Italian poet speaks, which makes all the earth a desert--

             "Senza quella
    Nova, sola, infinita,
    Felicitá che il suo pensier figura."

He never complained again of being too happy, or forgot that one time or
other the path of life must be trod with bleeding feet.

"But I'll not deny," said the minister, "that to the like of you, my
young lord, with so much in your power, there is no happier way of
amusing yourself than just in being of use and service to your poor
fellow-creatures that want so much and have so little. Man!" cried Mr.
Cameron, "I would have given my head to be able to do at your age the
half or quarter of what you can do with a scratch of your pen!--and you
must mind that you are bound to do it," he added with a smile.

But before this serene course of life began which Walter found too
happy, there was an interval of anxiety and pain. Mrs. Methven did not
escape, like the rest, from the consequences of the night's vigil. She
got up indeed from her faint, and received with speechless thanksgiving
her son back from the dead, as she thought, but had herself to be
carried to his room in the old castle, and there struggled for weeks in
the grips of fever, brought on, it was said, by the night's exposure.
But this she would not herself allow. She had felt it, she said, before
she left her home, but concealed it, not to be hindered from obeying her
son's summons. If this was true, or invented upon the spur of the moment
to prove that in no possible way was Walter to blame, it is impossible
to say. But the fever ran very high, and so affected her heart, worn and
tired by many assaults, that there was a time when everything was hushed
and silenced in the old castle in expectation of death. By-and-by,
however, that terror gave place to all the innocent joys of
convalescence--soft flitting of women up and down, presents of precious
flowers and fruits lighting up the gloom, afternoon meetings when
everything that could please her was brought to the recovering mother,
and all the loch came with inquiries, with good wishes, and kind
offerings. Mrs. Forrester, who was an excellent nurse, and never lost
heart, but smiled, and was sure, in the deepest depth, that all would
"come right," as she said, took the control of the sick-room, and
recovered there the bloom which she had partially lost when Oona was in
danger. And Oona stole into the heart of Walter's mother, who had not
for long years possessed him sufficiently to make it bitter to her that
he should now put a wife before her. Some women never learn this
philosophy; and perhaps Mrs. Methven might have resisted it, had not
Oona, her first acquaintance on the loch, her tenderest nurse, won her
heart. To have the grim old house in which the secret of the Methvens'
fate had been laid up, and in which, even to indifferent lookers-on,
there had always been an atmosphere of mystery and terror, thus occupied
with the most innocent and cheerful commonplaces, the little cares and
simple pleasures of a long but hopeful recovery, was confusing and
soothing beyond measure to all around. The old servants, who had borne
for many years the presence of a secret which was not theirs, felt in
this general commotion a relief which words could not express. "No," old
Symington said, "it's not ghosts nor any such rubbitch. I never, for my
part, here or elsewhere, saw onything worse than myself; but, Miss Oona,
whatever it was that you did on the tap of that tower--and how you got
there the Lord above knows, for there never was footing for a bird that
ever I saw--it has just been blessed. 'Ding down the nests and the craws
will flee away.' What am I meaning? Well, that is just what I canna
tell. It's a' confusion. I know nothing. Many a fricht and many an
anxious hour have I had here: but I am bound to say I never saw anything
worse than mysel'."

"All yon is just clavers," said old Macalister, waving his hand. "If ye
come to that there is naething in this life that will bide explaining.
But I will not deny that there is a kind of a different feel in the air
which is maybe owing to this fine weather, just wonderful for the
season; or maybe to the fact of so many leddies about, which is a new
thing here--no that I hold so much with women," he added, lest Oona
should be proud, "they are a great fyke and trouble, and will meddle
with everything; but they're fine for a change, and a kind of soothing
for a little whilie at a time, after all we've gone through."

Before the gentle _régime_ of the sick-room was quite over, an unusual
and unexpected visitor arrived one morning at Loch Houran. It was the
day after that on which Mrs. Methven had been transferred to
Auchnasheen, and a great festival among her attendants. She had been
brought down to the drawing-room very pale and shadowy, but with a
relaxation of all the sterner lines which had once been in her face, in
invalid dress arranged after Mrs. Forrester's taste rather than her own,
and lending a still further softness to her appearance, not to be
associated with her usual rigid garb of black and white. And her looks
and tones were the most soft of all, as, the centre of everybody's
thoughts, she was led to the sofa near the fire and surrounded by that
half-worship which is the right of a convalescent where love is. To this
pleasant home-scene there entered suddenly, ushered in with great
solemnity by Symington, the serious and somewhat stern "man of business"
who had come to Sloebury not much more than a year before with the news
of that wonderful inheritance so unexpected and unthought of, which had
seemed to Mrs. Methven, as well as to her son, the beginning of a new
life. Mr. Milnathort made kind but formal inquiries after Mrs. Methven's
health, and offered his congratulations no less formally upon her
recovery.

"I need not say to you that all that has happened has been an interest
to us that are connected with the family beyond anything that I can
express. I have taken the liberty," he added, turning to Walter, "to
bring one to see you, Lord Erradeen, who has perhaps the best right of
any one living to give ye joy. I told her that you would no doubt come
to her, for she has not left her chamber, as you know, for many a year;
but nothing would serve her but to come herself, frail as she is----"

"Your sister!" Walter cried.

"Just my sister. I have taken the liberty," Mr. Milnathort repeated, "to
have her carried into the library, where you will find her. She has
borne the journey better than I could have hoped, but it is an
experiment that makes me very anxious. You will spare her any--emotion,
any shock, that you can help?"

The serious face of the lawyer was more serious than ever: his long
upper lip trembled a little. He turned round to the others with anxious
self-restraint.

"She is very frail," he said, "a delicate bit creature all her life--and
since her accident--"

He spoke of this, as his manner was, as if it had happened a week ago.

Walter hurried away to the library, in which he found Miss Milnathort
carefully arranged upon a sofa, wrapped up in white furs instead of her
usual garments, a close white hood surrounding the delicate brightness
of her face. She held out her hands to him at first without a word; and
when she could speak, said, with a tremble in her voice:

"I have come to see the end of it. I have come to see--her and you."

"I should have come to you," cried Walter, "I did not forget--but for my
mother's illness----"

"Yes?" she said with a grateful look. "You thought upon me? Oh, but my
heart has been with her and you! Oh, the terrible time it was! the first
news in the papers, the fear that you were buried there under the ruins,
you--and she; and then to wait a night and a day."

"I should have sent you word at once--I might have known; but I did not
think of the papers."

"No, how should you? you were too busy with your own life. Oh, the
thoughts of that night. I just lay and watched for you from the
darkening to the dawning. No, scarcely what you could call praying--just
waiting upon the Lord. I bade Him mind upon Walter and me--that had lost
the battle. And I thought I saw you, you and your Oona. Was not I wise
when I said it was a well-omened name?" She paused a little, weeping and
smiling. "I could not tell you all the thoughts that went through my
mind. I thought if it was even so, there might have been a worse fate.
To break the spell and defeat the enemy even at the cost of your two
bonnie lives--I thought it would not be an ill fate, the two of you
together. Did I not say it? Two that made up one, the perfect man. That
is God's ordinance, my dear? that is His ordinance. Two--not just for
pleasure, or for each other, but for Him and everything that is good.
You believed me when I said that. Oh, you believed me! and so it was not
in vain that I was--killed yon time long ago----" Her voice was broken
with sobs. She leant upon Walter's shoulder who had knelt down beside
her, and wept there like a child--taking comfort like a child.
"Generally," she began after a moment, "there is little account made,
little, little account, of them that have gone before, that have been
beaten, Walter. I can call you nothing but Walter to-day. And Oona,
though she has won the battle, she is just me, but better. We lost. We
had the same heart; but the time had not come for the victory. And now
you, my young lord, you, young Erradeen, like him, you have won, Oona
and you. We were beaten; but yet I have a share in it. How can you tell,
a young man like you, how those that have been defeated, lift their
hearts and give God thanks?" She made a pause and said, after a moment,
"I must see Oona, too." But when he was about to rise and leave her in
order to bring Oona, she stopped him once more. "You must tell me
first," she said, speaking very low, "what is become of _him_? Did he
let himself be borne away to the clouds in yon flames? I know, I know,
it's all done; but did you see him? Did he speak a word at the end?"

"Miss Milnathort," said Walter, holding her hands, "there is nothing but
confusion in my mind. Was it all a dream and a delusion from beginning
to end?"

She laughed a strange little laugh of emotion.

"Look at me then," she said, "for what have I suffered these thirty
years? And you--was it all for nothing that you were so soon beaten and
ready to fall? Have you not seen him? Did he go without a word?"

Walter looked back upon all the anguish through which he had passed, and
it seemed to him but a dream. One great event, and then weeks of calm
had intervened since the day when driven to the side of the loch in
madness and misery, he had found Oona and taken refuge in her boat, and
thrown himself on her mercy; and since the night when once more driven
distracted by diabolical suggestions, he had stepped out into the
darkness, meaning to lose himself somehow in the gloom and be no more
heard of--yet was saved again by the little light in her window, the
watch-light that love kept burning. These recollections and many more
swept through his mind, and the pain and misery more remote upon which
this old woman's childlike countenance had shone. He could not take
hold of them as they rose before him in the darkness, cast far away into
a shadowy background by the brightness and reality of the present. A
strange giddiness came over his brain. He could not tell which was real,
the anguish that was over, or the peace that had come, or whether life
itself--flying in clouds behind him, before him hid under the
wide-spreading sunshine--was anything but a dream. He recovered himself
with an effort, grasping hold of the latest recollection to satisfy his
questioner.

"This I know," he cried, "that when we were flying from the tower, with
flames and destruction behind us, the only words I heard from her were a
prayer for pardon--'forgive him,' that was all I heard. And then the
rush of the air in our faces, and roar that was like the end of all
things. We neither heard nor saw more."

"Pardon!" said Miss Milnathort, drying her eyes with a trembling hand,
"that is what I have said too, many a weary hour in the watches of the
night. What pleasure can a spirit like yon find in the torture of his
own flesh and blood? The Lord forgive him if there is yet a place of
repentance! But well I know what you mean that it is just like a vision
when one awaketh. That is what all our troubles will be when the end
comes: just a dream! and good brought out of evil and pardon given to
many, many a one that men are just willing to give over and curse
instead of blessing. Now go and bring your Oona, my bonnie lad! I am
thinking she is just me, and you are Walter, and we have all won the day
together," said the invalid clasping her thin hands, and with eyes that
shone through their tears, "all won together! though we were beaten
twenty years ago."


THE END.

LONDON: R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, BREAD STREET HILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Note: Hyphen variations left as printed.]


[The end of _The Wizard's Son, Volume 3_ by Margaret Oliphant]






End of Project Gutenberg's The Wizard's Son, vol. 3, by Margaret Oliphant


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIZARD'S SON, VOL. 3 (OF 3) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


